Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus by Mary Wollstone-Craftshelly
The Letters
Letter 1
To Mrs. Seville, England, St. Petersburg, December 11th, sometime in the 1700s.
You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil forebodings.
I arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking.
I am already far north of London, and as I walk in the streets of Petersburg, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which braces my nerves and fills me with delight.
Do you understand this feeling? This breeze, which has traveled from the regions towards which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climbs.
Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the Pole is the seed of frost and desolation.
It ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight.
There, Margaret, the sun is forever visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendor.
There, for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators.
There, snow and frost are banished, and sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe.
Its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes.
What may not be expected in a country of eternal light?
I may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle, and may regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent forever.
I shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man.
These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death, and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat with his holiday mates on an expedition of discovery of his native river.
But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind through the last generation by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries to reach which, at present, so many months are requisite, or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet which, if at all possible, can only be affected by an undertaking such as mine.
These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquilize the mind as a steady purpose, a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye.
This expedition has been the favorite dream of my early years. I have read with ardor the accounts of the various voyages which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole.
You may remember that a history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our good Uncle Thomas's library.
My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had felt as a child on learning that my father's dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life.
These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven. I also became a poet, and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation. I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated.
You are well acquainted with my failure and how I heavily bore the disappointment. But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I can even now remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by a nearing my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea. I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep.
I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day, and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage.
Twice I actually hired myself as an undermate in a Greenland whaler and acquitted myself to admiration. I must own I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness so valuable did he consider my services.
And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some great purpose? My life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but I preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path.
Oh, that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative. My courage and my resolution is firm, but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude.
I am required not only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing. This is the most favorable period for travelling in Russia. They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges, the motion is pleasant and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an English stagecoach.
The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs, a dress which I have already adopted, for there is a great difference between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins.
I have no ambition to lose my life on that post road between St. Petersburg and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks, and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to the whale fishing.
I do not intend to sail until the month of June, and when shall I return? Dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon, or never.
Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down blessings on you and save me, that I may again and again testify my gratitude for all your love and kindness, your affectionate brother, R. Walton.
Letter 2. To Mrs. Seville, England. Archangel, 28th March, sometime in the 1700s.
How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost and snow, yet a second step is taken toward my enterprise. I have hired a vessel, and am occupied in collecting my sailors. Those whom I have already engaged appear to be men on whom I can depend, and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage.
But I have one want, which I have never yet been able to satisfy, and the absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no friend, Margaret. When I am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there will be none to participate my joy.
If I am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavor to sustain me in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true, but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of a man who could sympathize with me, whose eyes would reply to mine.
You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans.
How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother? I am too ardent in execution, and too impatient of difficulties. But it is a still greater evil to me that I am self-educated. For the first fourteen years of my life I rammed wild on a common, and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas's books of voyages.
At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own country, but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction that I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native country.
Now I am twenty-eight, and in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more, and my daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want, as the painters call it, keeping, and I greatly need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise me as a romantic, and affection enough for me to endeavor to regulate my mind.
Well, these are useless complaints. I shall surely find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even hear an archangel among merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms.
My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise. He is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an Englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity.
I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel. Finding that he was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise. The master is a person of excellent disposition, and is remarkable in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline.
This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude. My best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot overcome an intense distaste to the usual brutality exercised on board ship.
I have never believed it to be necessary, and when I heard of a mariner, equally noted for his kindliness of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services.
I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the happiness of her life. This, briefly, is his story. Some years ago he loved a young Russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable sum in prize money, the father of the girl consented to the match.
He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony, but she was bathed in tears and throwing herself at his feet, and treated him to spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor and that her father would never consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover, instantly abandoned his pursuit.
He had already bought a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life, but he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his prize money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman's father to consent to her marriage with her lover.
But the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations.
What a noble fellow, you will exclaim! He is so, but then he is wholly uneducated. He is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command.
Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little, or because I can conceive a consolation for my toils, which I may never know, that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation.
The winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I shall do nothing rashly. You know me sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed to my care.
I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my undertaking. It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which I am preparing to depart.
I am going to unexplored regions, to the land of mist and snow, but I shall kill no albatross. Therefore do not be alarmed for my safety, or if I should come back to you as worn and woeful as the ancient mariner. You will smile at my allusion, but I will disclose a secret.
I have often attributed my attachment to, my passion and enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean, to that production of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something at work in my soul which I do not understand.
I am practically industrious, painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labor, but besides this there is a love for the marvelous, a belief in the marvelous, intertwined in all my projects which hurries me out of the common pathways of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to explore.
But to return to dearer considerations, shall I meet you again, after having traversed immense seas and returned by most southern Cape of Africa or America? I dare not expect such success, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse of the picture.
Continue for the present to write to me by every opportunity. I may receive your letters on some occasions when I need them most to support my spirits. I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. Your affectionate brother, Robert Walton.
Letter 3. To Mrs. Seville, England. July 7th. Sometime in the 1700s.
My dear sister, I write a few lines in haste to say that I am safe and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel. More fortunate than I, who may not see my native land perhaps for many years, I am however in good spirits.
My men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of the region toward which we are advancing, appear to dismay them.
We have already reached a very high latitude, but it is the height of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had not expected.
No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter. One or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and I shall be well content if nothing worse happened to us during our voyage.
Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured that for my own sake, as well as yours, I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be cool, persevering, and prudent. But success shall crown my endeavours. Wherefore not?
Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man? My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But I must finish. Heaven bless my beloved sister. R. W.
Letter four. To Mrs. Seville, England, August 5th, sometime in the 1700s.
So strange an accident has happened to us that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can come into your possession.
Last Monday, July 31st, we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving the sea room in which she floated. Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
About two o'clock the mist cleared away and, we beheld, stretched out in every direction vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our situation.
We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile. A being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge and guided the dogs.
We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice. This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land, but this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed.
Shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest attention. About two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship.
We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large, loose masses which float about after the breaking up of ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few hours.
In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck and found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently talking to someone in the seas. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that which we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on a large fragment of ice.
Only one dog remained alive, but there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck, the master said, Here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish on the open sea.
On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. Before I come on board your vessel, said he, will you have the kindness to inform me whether you are bound?
You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction, and to whom I should have supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. I replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery toward the northern pole. Upon hearing this, he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
Good God, Margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering. I never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air he fainted.
We accordingly brought him back to the deck, and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as he showed signs of life, we wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen stove. By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully.
Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had in some measure recovered, I removed him to my own cabin and attended on him as much as my duty would permit.
I never saw a more interesting creature. His eyes have generally an expression of wildness and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone performs an act of kindness towards him, or does him any the most trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that I never saw equalled.
But he is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.
When my guest was a little recovered, I had great trouble to keep off the men who wished to ask him a thousand questions, but I would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity in a state of body and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
Once, however, the lieutenant asked why he had come so far upon the ice in so strange a vehicle. His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied,
To seek one who fled from me.
And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?
Yes.
Then I fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge with a man in it across the ice.
This aroused the stranger's attention, and he asked a multitude of questions concerning the route which the demon, as he called him, had pursued.
Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said,
I have doubtless excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people, but you are too considerate to make inquiries.
Certainly, it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.
And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation, you have benevolently restored me to life.
Soon after this he inquired if I thought that the breaking up of the ice had destroyed the other sledge.
I replied that I could not answer with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety before that time, but of this I could not judge.
From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger.
He manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for the sledge, which had before appeared.
But I have persuaded him to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
I have promised that someone should watch for him, and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight.
Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the present day.
The stranger has gradually improved in health, but is very silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all interested in him, although they have had very little communication with him.
For my own part, I begin to love him as a brother, and his constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion.
He must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable.
I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find no friend on the wide ocean.
Yet I have found a man who, before his spirit had been broken by misery, I should have been happy to have possessed as the brother of my heart.
I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, should I have any fresh incidents to record.
My affection for my guest increases every day.
He excites at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree.
How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief?
He is so gentle, yet so wise, his mind is so cultivated, and when he speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.
He is now much recovered from his illness, and is continually on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own.
Yet, although unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery, but that he interests himself deeply in the projects of others.
He has frequently conversed with me on mine, which I have communicated to him without disguise.
He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success, and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken to secure it.
I was easily led by the sympathy which he evinced to use the language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul,
and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise.
One man's life or death were but a small price to pay for the acquirement of the knowledge which I sought, for the dominion I should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race.
As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listener's countenance. At first, I perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion.
He placed his hands before his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I beheld tears trickle fast from beneath his fingers.
A groan burst from his heaving breast. I paused, at length he spoke in broken accents.
Unhappy man, do you share my madness? Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught?
Hear me, let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips.
Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity.
But the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were necessary to restore his composure.
Having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion, and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally.
He asked me the history of my earlier years. The tale was quickly told, but it awakened various trains of reflection.
I spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.
I agree with you, replied the stranger. We are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves, such a friend ought to be.
Do not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures.
I once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled therefore to judge respecting friendship.
You have hope and the world before you, and have no cause for despair, but I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.
As he said this, his countenance became expressive of a calm, settled grief that touched me to the heart.
But he was silent and presently retired to his cabin.
Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature.
The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seems still to have the power of elevating his soul from earth.
Such a man has a double existence. He may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments.
Yet, when he has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.
Will you smile at the enthusiasm I express concerning this divine wanderer? You would not if you saw him.
You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious.
But this only renders you the more fit to appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man.
Sometimes I have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew.
I believe it to be an intuitive discernment, a quick but never failing power of judgment, a penetration into the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision,
and to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.
August 19th, sometime in the 1700s.
Yesterday the stranger said to me,
You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes.
I had determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with me, but you have won me to alter my determination.
You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did, and I ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been.
I do not know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to you, yet when I reflect that you are pursuing the same course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am,
I imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of failure.
Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous.
Were we among the tamer scenes of nature, I might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule.
But many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever varied powers of nature.
Nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.
You may easily imagine that I was much gratified by the offered communication, yet I could not endure that he should renew his grief by a recital of his misfortunes.
I felt the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate, if it were in my power.
I expressed these feelings in my answer.
I thank you, he replied, for your sympathy, but it is useless. My fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and then I shall repose in peace.
I understand your feeling, continued he, perceiving that I wished to interrupt him. But you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you.
Nothing can alter my destiny. Listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.
He then told me that he would commence his narrative the next day when I should be at leisure.
This promise drew for me the warmest thanks. I have resolved every night, when I am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day.
If I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure, but to me, who know him, and who hear it from his own lips, with what interest and sympathy shall I read it in some future day?
Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears. His lustrous eyes dwell on me with all their melancholy sweetness. I see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul within.
Strange and harrowing must be his story. Frightful the storm which embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it thus.
I am by birth a Genovese, and my family is one of the most distinguished of that Republic.
My ancestors had been for many years counselors and syndics, and my father had filled several
public situations with honor and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him for his
integrity and indefatigable attention to public business. He passed his younger days perpetually
occupied by the affairs of his country. A variety of circumstances had prevented his
marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he had become a husband and the
father of a family. As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot
refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate friends was a merchant who, from
a flourishing state, fell through numerous mischances into poverty. This man, whose name
was Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposition, and could not bear to live in
poverty and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his
rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honorable manner, he
retreated with his daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness.
My father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship, and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these
unfortunate circumstances. He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a
conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them. He lost no time in endeavoring
to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit
and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten
months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to
the house which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery
and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the
lack of his fortunes, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months,
and in the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant's house.
The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction. His grief only became more deep and rankling
when he had leisure for reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that
at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness incapable of any exertion.
His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw with despair that
their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there was no other prospect of support.
But Carolyn Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mold, and her courage rose to support
her in her adversity. She procured plain work, she plated straw, and by various means contrived
to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.
Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse, her time was more entirely
occupied in attending him, her means of subsistence decreased, and in the tenth month her father
died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her, and
she knelt by Beaufort's coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber. He came
like a protecting spirit to the poor girl who committed herself to his care, and after
the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva and placed her under the protection
of a relation. Two years after this event Carolyn became his wife.
There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance
seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection. There was a sense of
justice in my father's upright mind which rendered it unnecessary that he should approve
highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the late discovered
unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a greater value on tried worth.
There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing
wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her virtues
and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured,
but which gave inexpressible grace to his behavior to her. Everything was made to yield
to her wishes and her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic as sheltered
by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her with all that could tend to
excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind. Her health, and even the
tranquility of her hitherto constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through.
During the two years that it elapsed, previous to their marriage, my father had gradually
relinquished all his public functions, and immediately after their union they sought
the pleasant climate of Italy and the change of scene and interest attendant on a tour
through that land of wonders as a restorative for her weakened frame.
From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their eldest child, was born at Naples
and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. I remained for several years their
only child. Much as they were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible
stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me. My mother's tender
caresses and my father's smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my first recollections.
I was their plaything and their idol, and something better, their child, the innocent
and helpless creature bestowed upon them by Heaven, whom to bring up to good and whose
future lot it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery according as they fulfilled
their duties toward me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which
they had given life, added to the active spirit of tenderness that animated both, it may be
imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience,
of charity and of self-control, and was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but
one train of enjoyment to me.
For a long time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a daughter,
but I continued their single offspring. When I was about five years old, while making an
excursion beyond the frontiers of Italy, they had passed a week on the shores of the Lake
of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor.
This, to my mother, was more than a duty, it was a necessity, a passion, remembering
what she had suffered and how she had been relieved. For her to act in her turn the guardian
angel to the afflicted.
During one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a veil attracted their notice
as being singularly disconsolate, while the number of half-clothed children gathered about
it spoke of penury of its worst shape. One day, when my father had gone by himself to
Milan, my mother accompanied by me visited this abode.
She found a peasant and his wife hard working, bent down by care and labor, distributing
a scanty meal to five hungry babes. Among these there was one which attracted my mother
far above all the rest. She appeared of a different stock. The four others were dark-eyed,
hardy little vagrants. This child was thin and very fair. Her hair was the brightest
living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction
on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and
the molding of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without
looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, and bearing a celestial
stamp in all her features.
The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and admiration on this
lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was not her child, but the daughter of
a Milanese noblewoman. Her mother was a German and had died on giving her birth. The infant
had been placed with these good people to nurse. They were better off then. They had
not been long married, and their eldest child was but just born. The father of their charge
was one of those Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of Italy, one among
the sciavi Agnor Frumenti, who exerted himself to obtain the liberty of his country. He became
the victim of its weakness. Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of
Austria was not known. His property was confiscated. His child became an orphan and a beggar.
She continued with her foster parents, and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a
garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found, playing
with me in the hall of our villa, a child fairer than the pictured cherub, a creature
who seemed to shed radiance from all her looks, and whose form and motions were lighter than
the chamois of the hills. The apparition was soon explained.
With his permission, my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge
to her. They were fond of the sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed a blessing to them,
but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want when Providence offered
her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that
Elizabeth Levenza became the inmate of my parents' house, my more than sister, the beautiful
and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.
Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all
regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous
to her being brought to my home, my mother said playfully, I have a present for my victor.
Tomorrow he shall have it. And when, on the morrow, she presented Elizabeth to me as her
promised gift, I, with childish seriousness, interpreted her words literally, and looked
upon Elizabeth as mine, mine to protect, love, and cherish. All praises I bestowed on her
I received as made to a possession of my own. We called each other familiarly by the name
of cousin. No word, no expression could body forth the kind of relation in which she stood
to me, my more than sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
We were brought up together. There was not quite a year of difference in our ages. I need not say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute. Harmony was the soul of our companionship, and the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us nearer together.
Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated disposition. But, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more intense application, and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
She busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets, and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss home, the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons, tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of our alpine summers, she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes. The world was to me a secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember.
On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life, and fixed themselves in their native country.
We possessed a house in Geneva, and a campaign on Belle-Rive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion.
It was my temper to avoid a crowd, and to attach myself fervently to a few. I was indifferent therefore to my school fellows in general, but I united myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them.
Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance.
He composed heroic songs, and began to write many a tale of enchantment and nightly adventure. He tried to make us act plays, and to enter into masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of Ronceval, of the round table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulcher from the hands of the infidels.
No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. My parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights which we enjoyed.
When I mingled with other families, I distinctly discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted the development of filial love.
My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement, but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits, but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things indiscriminately.
I confess that neither the structure of languages, nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states possessed attractions for me. It was the secrets of heaven and earth that I desired to learn, and whether it was the outward substance of things, or the inner spirit of nature, and the mysterious soul of man that occupied me,
still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.
Meanwhile, Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme, and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species.
The saintly soul of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home. Her sympathy was ours. Her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes were ever there to bless and animate us.
She was the living spirit of love to soften and attract. I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness.
And Clerval, could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Clerval? Yet he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of beneficence, and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition.
I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self.
Besides, in drawing the picture of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after-tale of misery. For when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion which ever afterwards ruled my destiny, I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources.
But swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.
Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate. I desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my predilection for that science.
When I was thirteen years of age, we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon. The inclementcy of the weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa.
I opened it with apathy. The theory which he attempts to demonstrate, and the wonderful facts which he relates, soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm.
A new light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy I communicated my discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said,
Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this. It is sad trash.
If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded, and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient,
because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical. Under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies.
It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was acquainted with its contents, and I continued to read with the greatest avidity.
When I returned home, my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight. They appeared to me treasures known to few besides myself.
I have described myself as always having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of nature. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
Sir Isaac Newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of his successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted appeared even to my boy's apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same pursuit.
The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him, and was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery.
He might dissect, anatomize, and give names, but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined.
But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I became their disciple. It may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth century, but while I followed the routine of education in the schools of Geneva I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite studies.
My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a child's blindness, added to a student's thirst for knowledge. Under the guidance of my new preceptors I entered with the greatest diligence into the search of the philosopher's stone and the elixir of life, but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention.
Wealth was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I could banish disease from the human frame, and render man invulnerable to any but a violent death?
Nor were these my only visions.
The raising of ghosts or devils was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which I most eagerly sought, and if my incantations were always unsuccessful I attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake, than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors.
And thus for a time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories, and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near Belle-Rive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm.
It advanced from behind the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens.
I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak, which stood about twenty yards from our house, and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump.
When we visited it the next morning we found the tree shattered in a singular manner.
It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. I had never beheld anything so utterly destroyed.
Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity.
On this occasion a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe he entered on the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination, but by some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my accustomed studies.
It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable.
By one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge.
In this mood of mind I betook myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
Thus, strangely, are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin.
When I look back, it seems to me as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life, the last effort made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me.
Her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting studies. It was thus that I was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.
It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual. Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and terrible destruction.
When I had attained the age of seventeen, my parents resolved that I should become a
student at the University of Ingolstadt.
I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the
completion of my education that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those
of my native country.
My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could
arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever, her illness was severe, and she was in the greatest
danger. During her illness, many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain
from attending upon her. She had at first yielded to her entreaties, but when she heard
that the life of her favorites was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety.
She attended her sickbed, her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity of the
temper. Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her
preserver. On the third day, my mother sickened. Her fever was accompanied by the most alarming
symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her
deathbed, the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her. She joined
the hands of Elizabeth and myself.
My children, she said, my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed in the prospect
of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father. Elizabeth,
my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas, I regret that I am taken from
you. And, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? But these
are not thoughts befitting me. I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death, and
will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world. She died calmly, and her countenance
expressed affection even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest
ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul
and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade
itself that she whom we saw every day, and whose very existence appeared part of our own,
can have departed forever, that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished,
and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard.
These are the reflections of the first days. But when the lapse of time proves the reality
of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not the
rude hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I describe a sorrow which all have
felt and must feel? The time at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a
necessity, and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege,
is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still duties we ought to perform. We must
continue our course with the rest, and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains
whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these
events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It
appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose akin to death of the house of mourning
and to rush into the thick of life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me.
I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above all I desired to see my
sweet Elizabeth in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief, and strove to act the
comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life, and assumed its duties with courage and zeal.
She devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins.
Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles
and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
The day of my departure at length arrived. Clairvaux spent the last evening with us.
He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to accompany me and to become my
fellow student, but in vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader, and saw idleness and ruin
in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being
from a liberal education. He said little, but when he spoke, I read in his kindling eye and in his
animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce.
We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each other, nor persuade ourselves to say
the word farewell. It was said, and we retired under the pretense of seeking repose, each fancying
the other was deceived. But when, at morning's dawn, I descended to the carriage which was to
convey me away, they were all there. My father, again to bless me, Clairvaux, to press my hand
once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would write often and to bestow the last
feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey
me away and indulge in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded
by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure.
I was now alone. In the university whither I was going, I must form my own friends and be my own
protector. My life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me
invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth and Clairvaux.
These were old familiar faces, but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of
strangers. Such were my reflections as I commenced my journey. But as I proceeded,
my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge.
I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth, cooped up in one place,
and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires
were complied with, and it would indeed have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these
and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing.
At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted and was conducted to my
solitary apartment to spend the evening as I pleased. The next morning I delivered my
introduction, and paid a visit to some of the principal professors. Chant, or rather the evil
influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the
moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father's door, led me first to Monsieur Cramp,
professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets
of his science. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches
of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt,
mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied.
The professor stared.
Have you, he said, really spent your time in studying such nonsense?
I replied in the affirmative.
Every minute, continued Monsieur Cramp with warmth, every instance that you have wasted
on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded
systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived where no one was
kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand
years old and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected, in this enlightened and
scientific age, to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must
begin your studies entirely anew. So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of
several books treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed
me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to commence
a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that Monsieur
Voltmann, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days he omitted.
I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long considered those authors
useless whom the professor reprobated, but I returned not at all the more inclined to
recur to these studies in any shape. Monsieur Cramp was a little squat man with a gruff
voice and a repulsive countenance. The teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of
his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected strain, perhaps, I have given
an account of the conclusions I had come to concerning them in my early years. As a child,
I had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science.
With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide
on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged
the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides,
I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very different when the masters
of the science sought immortality and power. Such views, although futile, were grand. But now the
scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of
those visions on which my interest in the science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange
shimmers of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth. Such were my reflections during
the first two or three days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
acquainted with the localities and the principal residence in my new abode. But as the ensuing
week commenced, I thought of the information which Mr. Cramp had given me concerning the lectures.
And although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences
out of the pulpit, I recollected what he had said of Mr. Waldman, whom I had never seen,
as he had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness,
I went into the lecturing room which Mr. Waldman entered shortly after.
This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age,
but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence. A few grey hairs covered his temples,
but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect,
and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the
history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the
present state of the science, and explained many of its elementary terms. After having made a few
preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of
which I shall never forget.
The ancient teachers of this science, he said, promised impossibilities and performed nothing.
The modern masters promise very little. They know that metals cannot be transmuted,
and that the excelsior of life is a shimmerer. But these philosophers, whose hands seem only
made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pour over the microscope or crucible,
have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature,
and show how she walks in our hiding places. They ascend into the heavens. They have discovered how
the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost
unlimited powers. They can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock
the invisible world with its own shadows.
Such were the professor's words. Rather let me say, such the words of the fate announced to
destroy me. As he went on, I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy.
One by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being.
Chord after chord were sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought,
one conception, one purpose.
So much has been done, exclaimed the soul of Frankenstein. More, far more will I achieve.
Treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way,
explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
I closed my eyes that night. My internal being was in a state of insurrection and turmoil.
I felt that order would thence arise, but I had no power to produce it.
By degrees, after the morning's dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight's thoughts
were as a dream. There only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies,
and to devote myself to a science for which I believe myself to possess a natural talent.
On the same day I paid Monsieur Waldemann a visit. His manners in private were even more
mild and attractive than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mane during his lectures,
which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness.
I gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as I had given his fellow
professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies, and smiled at
the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that Monsieur Cramp had
exhibited. He said that these were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were
indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task,
to give new names and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they, in a
great degree, had been the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius,
however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of
I listened to a statement which was delivered without any presumption or affectation,
and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudice against modern chemists.
I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference
due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape. An experience in life would
have made me ashamed. Any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours.
I requested his advice concerning books I ought to procure.
I am happy, said Monsieur Voltman, to have gained a disciple, and if your application
equals your ability, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural
philosophy in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made. It is on that account
that I have made it my peculiar study. But at the same time I have not neglected the other branches
of science. A man would make a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department
of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to become really a man of science, and not merely
a petty experimentalist, I would advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy,
including mathematics. He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses
of his various machines, instructing me as to what I ought to procure, and promising me
use of his own when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange the mechanism.
He also gave me a list of books which I had requested, and I took my leave.
Thus ended a day memorable to me. It decided my future destiny.
From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most comprehensive sense of the
term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works so full of genius and
discrimination which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the
lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the University, and found even
in Mr. Cramp a great deal of sound sense and real information, combined as is true with a repulsive
physiognomy and manners, but not, on that account, the less valuable. In Mr. Waltman I found a true
friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were given
an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways he
smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my
apprehension. My application was at first fluctuating and uncertain. It gained strength
as I proceeded, and soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared
in the light of morning, whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. As I applied so closely,
may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment
of the students, and my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Cramp often asked me,
with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst Monsieur Waltman expressed the most
heartfelt exaltation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I paid no
visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which I hoped
to make. None but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science.
In other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know,
but in scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder. A mind of moderate
capacity which closely pursues one study must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that
I, who continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was solely wrapped up in
this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two years I made some discoveries in the improvement
of some chemical instrument which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university.
When I had arrived at this point and had become as well acquainted with the theory and practice of
natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence
there being no longer conducive to my improvement, I thought of returning to my friends and my native
town when an incident happened that protracted my stay. One of the phenomena which had peculiarly
attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and indeed any animal endued with life.
Whence, I often ask myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was a bold question and one which
has ever been considered as a mystery. Yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming
acquainted if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries? I resolved these
circumstances in my mind and determined henceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches
of natural philosophy which related to physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural
enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome and almost intolerable.
To examine the causes of life we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the
science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient. I must also observe the natural decay and corruption
of the human body. In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my mind should
be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not even remember to have trembled at a tale of
The darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies
deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm.
Now I was led to examine the cause and the progress of this decay and forced to spend
days and nights in vaults and charnel houses. My attention was fixed upon every object the
most insupportable to the delicacy of human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was
degraded and wasted. I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life.
I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and the brain. I paused, examining and analyzing
all the minutiae of causation as exemplified in the change from life to death and death to life,
until, from the midst of this darkness, a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant
and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it
illuminated, I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries
towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret.
Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not more certainly
shine in the heavens than that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it,
yet the stages of the discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights of incredible
labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life. Nay, more,
I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter.
The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to delight in
rapture. After so much time spent in painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my
desires was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great
and overwhelming that all the steps by which I had been progressively led to it were obliterated,
and I beheld only the result. What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since
creation of the world was now within my grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon
me at once. The information I had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as
I should point them towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already
accomplished. I was like the Arabian who had been buried with the dead and found a passage to life
aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light. I see by your eagerness
and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the
secret with which I am acquainted. That cannot be. Listen patiently until the end of my story,
and you will easily perceive why I am so reserved on that subject. I will not lead you on,
unguarded and ardent, as I then was, to your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from
me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge and
how much happier that man is who believes his native town to be the world than he who aspires
to become greater than his nature will allow. When I found so astonishing a power placed within my
hands, I hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it.
Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing life, yet to prepare a frame for the reception
of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles and veins, still remained a work of
inconceivable difficulty and labour. I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation
of a being like myself, or one of simpler organisation, but my imagination was too much
exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal
as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at present within my command hardly appeared
adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed.
I prepared myself for a multitude of reverses. My operations might be incessantly baffled,
and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered the improvement which every day
takes place in science and mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present attempts would
at least lay the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity
of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the
creation of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed,
I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make a being of gigantic stature, that is to say,
about eight feet in height and proportionally large. After having formed this determination
and having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials,
I began. No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards,
like a hurricane in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me ideal
bounds which I should break through and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new
species would bless me as its creator and source. Many happy and excellent natures would owe their
being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve
pursuing these reflections. I thought that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless matter,
I might in process of time, although I now found it impossible, to renew life where death had
apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits while I pursued my
undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study and my person had become
emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very brink of certainty, I failed. Yet still I
clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realise. One secret which I alone
possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated myself, and the moon gazed on my midnight labours
while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding places.
Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the
grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble and my
eyes swim with the remembrance, but then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urged
me forward. I seem to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit.
It was indeed but a passing trance that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as
the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate. I had returned to my old habits.
I collected bones from the charnel houses and disturbed with profane fingers the tremendous
secrets of the human frame, in a solitary chamber or other cell at the top of the house,
and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase,
I kept my workshop of filthy creation. My eyeballs were starting from their sockets
and attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room and the slaughterhouse
furnished many of my materials, and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation.
While still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near
to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, half and soul,
in one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season, never did the fields bestow a more plentiful
harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage. I brought my work near to a conclusion.
The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, half and soul, in one pursuit. It
was a most beautiful season, never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest nor
the vines yield a luxurious vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature.
And the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget
those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had not seen for so long a time.
I knew my silence disquieted them, and I well remembered the words of my father.
I know that while you are pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we
shall hear regularly from you.
You must pardon me if I regard any interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your
other duties are equally neglected.
I knew well, therefore, what would be my father's feelings, but I could not tear my thoughts
from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my
imagination.
I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until
the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed.
I then thought my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect to vice or faultiness
on my part, but I am now convinced that he was justified in conceiving that I should
not be altogether free from blame.
A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind, and never
allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity.
I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule.
If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to
destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that
study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind.
If this rule were always observed, if no man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere
with the tranquillity of his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved, Caesar would
have spared his country, America would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires
of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.
But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my tale, and your looks
remind me to proceed.
My father made no reproach in his letters, and only took notice of my silence by inquiring
into my occupations more particularly than before.
Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours, but I did not watch the blossom
on the expanding leaves, sights which before always yielded me supreme delight, so deeply
was I engrossed in my occupation.
The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near a close, and now every day
showed me more plainly how well I had succeeded.
But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one doomed by
slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade, than an artist occupied
by his favourite employment.
Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree.
The fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow creatures as if I had been guilty
of a crime.
Sometimes I grew alarmed at the wreck I perceived that I had become, and the energy of my purpose
alone sustained me.
My labours would soon end, and I believed that exercise and amusement would then drive
away incipient disease, and I promised myself both of these when my creation should be complete.
This is Frankenstein or the Modern Prometheus by Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin Shelley.
It was already one in the morning.
The rain pattered dismally against the panes and my candle was nearly burnt out.
When by the glimmer of the half extinguished light I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open.
It breathed hard and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs.
How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe?
Or how delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavored to form.
His limbs were in proportion and I had selected his features as beautiful.
Beautiful, great God! His yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath.
His hair was of a lustrous black and flowing, his teeth of a pearly whiteness.
But these luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes that seemed almost of the same color as the done white sockets in which they were set.
His shriveled complexion and straight black lips.
The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of human nature.
I had worked hard for nearly two years for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body.
For this I had deprived myself of rest and health.
I had desired it with an ardor that far exceeded moderation.
But now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart.
Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out of the room and continued a long time traversing my bedchamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep.
At length, lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had before endured, and I threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavoring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness.
But it was in vain. I slept, indeed. But I was disturbed by the wildest dreams.
I thought I saw Elizabeth in the bloom of health, walking in the streets of Ingolstadt.
Delighted and surprised, I embraced her. But as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of death.
Her features appeared to change, and I thought that I held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms.
A shroud enveloped her form, and I saw the grave worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
I started from my sleep with horror. A cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed.
When by the dim and yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window shutters, I beheld the wretch, the miserable monster whom I had created.
He held up the curtain of the bed, and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on me.
His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks.
He might have spoken, but I did not hear.
One hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped and rushed downstairs.
I took refuge in the courtyard belonging to the house which I inhabited, where I remained during the rest of the night.
Walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound, as if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which I had so miserably given life.
Oh, no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch.
I had gazed on him while unfinished. He was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have conceived.
I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and hardly that I felt the palpitation of every artery.
At others, I nearly sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness.
Mingled with this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment. Dreams that had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a hell to me.
And the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete.
Mourning, dismal and wet, at length dawned, and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock which indicated the sixth hour.
The porter opened the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my view.
I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky.
I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind.
I traversed the streets without any clear conception of where I was or what I was doing.
My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me.
Like one who on a lonely road doth walk in fear and dread, and having once turned round walks on and turns no more his head, because he knows a frightful fiend doth close behind him tread.
Coleridge's Ancient Mariner
Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the various diligences and carriages usually stopped.
Here I paused, I knew not why, but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards me from the other end of the street.
As it drew nearer, I observed that it was the Swiss diligence.
It stopped just where I was standing, and on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clairvaux, who on seeing me instantly sprung out.
My dear Frankenstein, exclaimed he, how glad I am to see you.
How fortunate that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting.
Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clairvaux.
His presence brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection.
I grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror and misfortune.
I felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months, calm and serene joy.
I welcomed my friend therefore in the most cordial manner, and we walked towards my college.
Clairvaux continued talking for some time about our mutual friends, and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to Ingolstadt.
You may easily believe, said he, how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of bookkeeping.
And indeed, I believe I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in the vicar of Wakefield.
I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek. I eat heartily without Greek.
But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge.
It gives me the greatest delight to see you, but tell me how you left my father, brothers, and Elizabeth.
Very well and very happy. Only a little uneasy that they hear from you so seldom.
By the by, I mean to lecture you a little upon their account myself.
But, my dear Frankenstein, continued he, stopping short and gazing full in my face, I did not before remark how very ill you appear.
So thin and pale. You look as if you had been watching for several nights.
You have guessed right. I have lately been so deeply engaged in one occupation that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see.
But I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an end, and that I am at length free.
I trembled excessively. I could not endure to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night.
I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college.
I then reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might still be there, alive and walking about.
I dreaded to behold this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him.
Entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room.
My hand was already on the lock of the door before I recollected myself.
I then paused, and a cold shivering came over me.
I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they expect a specter to stand in waiting for them on the other side.
But nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in.
The apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest.
I could hardly believe that so great a good fortune could have befallen me.
But when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy and ran down to Clairvaux.
We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast.
But I was unable to contain myself.
It was not joy only that possessed me.
I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly.
I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place.
I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
Clairvaux at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival.
But when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not account.
And my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened and astonished him.
My dear Victor, cried he, what for God's sake is the matter?
Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of all this?
Do not ask me, cried I, putting my hands before my eyes, for I thought I saw the dreaded specter glide into the room.
He can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!
I imagined that the monster seized me. I struggled furiously and fell down in a fit.
Poor Clairvaux, what must have been his feelings?
A meeting which he anticipated with such joy so strangely turned to bitterness.
But I was not the witness of his grief, for I was lifeless and did not recover my senses for a long, long time.
This was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for several months.
During all that time Henry was my only nurse.
I afterwards learned that knowing my father's advanced age and unfitness for so long a journey,
and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my disorder.
He knew that I could not have a more kind and attentive nurse than himself.
And, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could towards them.
But I was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life.
The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was forever before my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him.
Doubtless my words surprised Henry.
He at first believed them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination,
but the pertinacity with which I continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.
By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered.
I remember the first time I became capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure.
I perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window.
It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence.
I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom.
My gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion.
Dearest Clairvaux, exclaimed I, how kind, how very good you are to me.
This whole winter, instead of being spent in study as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room.
How shall I ever repay you?
I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.
You will repay me entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can.
And since you appear in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?
I trembled. One subject? What could it be?
Could he allude to an object on whom I dared not even think?
Compose yourself, said Clairvaux, who observed my change of colour.
I will not mention it if it agitates you.
But your father and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own handwriting.
They hardly know how ill you have been, and are uneasy at your long silence.
Is that all, my dear Henry?
How could you suppose that my first thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love, and who are so deserving of my love?
If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you.
It is from your cousin, I believe.
This is Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus by Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin Shelley.
Clairvaux then put the following letter into my hands. It was from my own Elizabeth.
My dearest cousin, you have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear kind Henry
are not sufficient to reassure me on your account. You are forbidden to write, to hold a pen.
Yet one word from you, dear Victor, is necessary to calm our apprehensions.
For a long time I have thought that each post would bring this line,
and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt.
I have prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so long a journey.
Yet how often have I regretted not being able to perform it myself?
I figure to myself that the task of attending on your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary
who could never guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of your poor
cousin. Yet that is over now. Clairvaux writes that indeed you are getting better.
I eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
Get well and return to us. You will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly.
Your father's health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you,
but to be assured that you are well. And not a care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance.
How pleased you would be to remark the improvement of our earnest.
He is now 16 and full of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a true Swiss and to enter
into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his elder brother returns to us.
My uncle is not pleased with the idea of a military career in a distant country,
but Ernest never had your powers of application. He looks upon study as an odious fetter.
His time is spent in the open air climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that he will
become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the profession which he
has selected. Little alteration except the growth of our dear children has taken place since you
left us. The blue lake and snow-clad mountains, they never change, and I think our placid home
and our contented hearts are regulated by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up
my time and amuse me, and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing none but happy kind faces
around me. Since you left us, but one change has taken place in our little household.
Do you remember on what occasion Justine Moritz entered our family? Probably you do not.
I will relate her history, therefore, in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother,
was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third.
This girl had always been the favourite of her father, but through a strange perversity,
her mother could not endure her, and after the death of Monsieur Moritz, treated her very ill.
My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age,
prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at our house.
The republican institutions of our country have produced simpler and happier manners
than those which prevail in the great monarchies that surround it.
Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants,
and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised. Their manners are more refined and
moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant in France and England.
Justine, thus received in our family, learned the duties of a servant,
a condition which, in our fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and
a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. Justine, you may remember, was a great favourite
of yours, and I recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one glance from
Justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of
Angelica. She looked so frank-hearted and happy. My aunt conceived a great attachment for her,
by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that which she had first intended.
This benefit was fully repaid. Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world.
I do not mean that she made any professions. I never heard one pass her lips,
but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate,
yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model
of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now
she often reminds me of her. When my dearest aunt died, everyone was too much occupied in their own
grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most anxious
affection. Poor Justine was very ill, but other trials were reserved for her.
One by one her brothers and sister died, and her mother, with the exception of her neglected
daughter, was left childless. The conscience of the woman was troubled. She began to think that
deaths of her favourites was a judgment from heaven to chastise her partiality.
She was a Roman Catholic, and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had
conceived. Accordingly, a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt,
Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house.
She was much altered since the death of my aunt. Grief had given softness and a winning
mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity.
Nor was her residence at her mother's house of a nature to restore her gaiety.
The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to
forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her brothers
and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Moritz into a decline,
which at first increased her irritability. But she is now at peace forever.
She died on the first approach of cold weather at the beginning of this last winter.
Justine has just returned to us, and I assure you I love her tenderly.
She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty. As I mentioned before,
her mind and her expression continually remind me of my dear aunt.
I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin of little darling William.
I wish you could see him. He is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes,
dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each
cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two little wives,
but Louisa Byron is his favorite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.
Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip concerning the
people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory
visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne Esquire.
Her ugly sister Manon married Monsieur Duvalard, the rich banker, last autumn.
Your favorite school fellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the
He has already recovered his spirits and is reported to be on the point of marrying
a lively pretty French woman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow and much older than Manoir,
but she is very much admired and a favorite with everybody.
I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin, but my anxiety returns upon me
as I conclude. Right, dearest Victor, one line, one word will be a blessing to us.
Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters. We are
sincerely grateful. Adieu, my cousin, take care of yourself, and I entreat you. Right.
Elizabeth Lavenza, Geneva, March 18th, 17.
Dear, dear Elizabeth, I exclaimed when I had read her letter. I will write instantly and relieve
them from the anxiety they must feel. I wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me, but my
convalescence had commenced and proceeded regularly. In another fortnight, I was able to leave my
chamber. One of my first duties on my recovery was to write a letter to my mother.
My next duty was to introduce Clairvaux to the several professors of the university.
In doing this, I underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had
sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of my labors and the beginning of my misfortunes,
I had conceived a violent antipathy even to the name of natural philosophy.
When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew
all the agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my
view. He had also changed my apartment, for he perceived that I had acquired a dislike for the
room which had previously been my laboratory. But these cares of Clairvaux were made of no avail
when I visited the professors. Mr. Waldman inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness
and warmth, the astonishing progress I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I disliked
the subject, but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to modesty and changed
the subject from my improvement to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw,
of drawing me out. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me.
I felt as if he had placed carefully, one by one, in my view, those instruments which were to be
afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not
exhibit the pain I felt. Clairvaux, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging in excuse his total ignorance, and the
conversation took a more general turn. I thanked my friend from my heart, but I did not speak.
I saw plainly that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me.
And although I loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew no bounds,
yet I could never persuade myself to confide in him that event which was so often present
to my recollection, but which I feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.
M. Crimp was not equally docile, and in my condition at that time of almost
insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the
benevolent approbation of M. Waldman. Damn the fellow, cried he! Why, M. Clairvaux, I assure
you he has outstripped us all. Ay, stare if you please, but it is nevertheless true.
A youngster who but a few years ago believed in Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as in the Gospel
has now set himself at the head of the university. And if he is not soon pulled down,
we shall all be out of countenance. Ay, ay, continued he, observing my face expressive of
suffering, M. Frankenstein is modest, an excellent quality in a young man.
Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clairvaux. I was myself when young,
but that wears out in a very short time. M. Crimp had now commenced a eulogy on himself,
which happily turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.
Clairvaux had never sympathized in my tastes for natural science, and his literary pursuits
differed wholly from those which had occupied me. He came to the university with the design of
making himself complete master of the Oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for
the plan of life he had marked out for himself. Resolved to pursue no inglorious career,
he turned his eyes toward the east, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise.
The Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit languages engaged his attention,
and I was easily induced to enter on the same studies.
Idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that I wished to fly from reflection and hated my
former studies, I felt great relief in being the fellow pupil with my friend, and found not only
instruction, but consolation in the works of the Orientalists. I did not, like him, attempt a
critical knowledge of their dialects, for I did not contemplate making any other use of them than
temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labors.
Their melancholy is soothing and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced
studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist
in a warm sun and a garden of roses, in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that
consumes your own heart. How different from the manly and heroic poetry of Greece and Rome!
Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to Geneva was fixed for the latter end of
autumn. But being delayed by several accidents, winter and snow arrived. The roads were deemed
impassable, and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. I felt this delay very bitterly,
for I longed to see my native town and my beloved friends. My return had only been delayed so long,
from an unwillingness to leave Clairvaux in a strange place, before he had become acquainted
with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent cheerfully, and although the spring was
uncommonly late, when it came, its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.
The month of May had already commenced, and I expected the letter daily, which was to fix the
date of my departure, when Henry proposed a pedestrian tour in the environs of Ingolstadt,
that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited.
I acceded with pleasure to this proposition. I was fond of exercise, and Clairvaux had always
been my favorite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had taken among the scenes of my
native country. We passed a fortnight in these perambulations. My health and spirits had long
been restored, and they gained additional strength from the salubrious air I breathed,
the natural incidence of our progress, and the conversation of my friend.
Study had before secluded me from the intercourse of my fellow creatures,
and rendered me unsocial, but Clairvaux called forth the better feelings of my heart.
He again taught me to love the aspect of nature and the cheerful faces of children.
Excellent friend, how sincerely you did love me,
and endeavored to elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own.
A selfish pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and affection warmed and
opened my senses. I became the same happy creature who, a few years ago, loved and beloved by all,
had no sorrow or care. When happy inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the
most delightful sensations, a serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy.
The present season was indeed divine. The flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges,
while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during
the preceding year had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavors to throw them off,
with an invincible burden. Henry rejoiced in my gaiety and searly sympathized in my feelings.
He exerted himself to amuse me while he expressed the sensations that filled his soul.
The resources of his mind on this occasion were truly astonishing. His conversation was full of
imagination, and very often, in imitation of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales of
wonderful fancy and passion. At other times, he repeated my favorite poems or drew me out
into arguments which he supported with great ingenuity. We returned to our college on a Sunday
afternoon. The peasants were dancing, and everyone we met appeared gay and happy.
My own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
On my return, I found the following letter
from my father. My dear Victor, you have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date
of your return to us, and I was at first tempted to write only a few lines, merely mentioning the
day on which I should expect you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What
would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold on the contrary
tears and wretchedness? And how, Victor, can I relate our misfortune? Absence cannot have rendered
you callous to our joys and griefs, and how shall I inflect pain on my long-absent son? I wish to
prepare you for the woeful news, but I know it is impossible. Even now your eye skims over the page
to seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings. William is dead. That sweet child
whose smiles delighted and warmed my heart, who was so gentle yet so gay. Victor, he is murdered.
I will not attempt to console you, but will simply relate the circumstances of the transaction. Last
Thursday, May the 7th, I, my niece, and your two brothers went to walk in Blancpale. The evening
was warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk before
we thought of returning, and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone on before,
were not to be found. We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest
came and inquired if we had seen his brother. He said that he had been playing with him,
that William had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards
he waited a long time, but that he did not return. This account rather alarmed us, and we continued
to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have returned to the
house. He was not there. We returned again with torches, for I could not rest when I thought
that my sweet boy had lost himself and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night.
Elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy,
whom the night before I had seen blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass,
livid and motionless. The print of the murderer's finger was on his neck. He was conveyed home,
and the anguish that was visible in my countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She was very
earnest to see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her, but she persisted, and entering
the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands,
exclaimed, Oh, God, I have murdered my darling child. She fainted and was restored with extreme
difficulty. When she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me that that same evening
William had teased her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your
mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the
deed. We have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are
remitted, but they will not restore my beloved William. Come, dearest Victor, you alone can
console Elizabeth. She weeps continually and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his
death. Her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy, but will not that be an additional
motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? Your dear mother, alas, Victor,
I now say thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling.
Come, Victor, not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of peace
and gentleness that will heal instead of festering the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of
mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not with
hatred for your enemies. Your affectionate and afflicted father, Alphonse Frankenstein,
Geneva, May 12th, 17 blank blank. Clairvaux, who had watched my countenance as I read this
letter, was surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy I had first expressed
on receiving news from my friends. I threw the letter on the table and covered my face with my
hands. My dear Frankenstein, exclaimed Henry when he perceived me weep with bitterness,
Are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened? I motioned him to take up the
letter while I walked up and down the room in the extremist agitation. Tears also gushed from the
eyes of Clairvaux as he read the account of my misfortune. I can offer you no consolation,
my friend, said he. Your disaster is irreparable. What do you intend to do? To go instantly to
Geneva. Come with me, Henry, to order the horses. During our walk, Clairvaux endeavoured to say a
few words of consolation. He could only express his heartfelt sympathy. Poor William, said he.
Dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother, who that had seen him bright and joyous
in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss. To die so miserably, to feel the
how much more a murder that could destroy radiant innocence. Poor little fellow,
one only consolation have we. His friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest. The pang is over,
his sufferings are at an end forever. A sod covers his gentle form and he knows no pain.
He can no longer be a subject for pity. We must reserve that for his miserable survivors.
Clairvaux spoke thus as we hurried through the streets. The words impressed themselves on my
mind and I remembered them afterwards in solitude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived,
I hurried into a cabriolet and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first,
I wished to hurry on, for I longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends,
but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my progress. I could hardly sustain the multitude
of feelings that crowded into my mind. I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which
I had not seen for nearly six years. How altered everything might be during that time. One sudden
and desolating change had taken place, but a thousand little circumstances might have done
by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly,
might not be the less decisive. Fear overcame me. I dared no advance, dreading a thousand nameless
evils that made me tremble, although I was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne,
in this painful state of mind. I contemplated the lake. The waters were placid, all around was calm,
and the snowy mountains, the palaces of nature, were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly
scene restored me, and I continued my journey towards Geneva. The road ran by the side of the
lake, which became narrower as I approached my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black
sides of Jura and the bright summit of Mont Blanc. I wept like a child. Dear mountains,
my own beautiful lake, how do you welcome your wanderer? Your summits are clear, the sky and
the lake are blue and placid. Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness? I fear,
my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances,
but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My country,
my beloved country, who but a native can tell the delight I took in again beholding thy
streams, thy mountains, and more than all, thy lovely lake? Yet, as I drew nearer home,
grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around, and when I could hardly see the
dark mountains I felt still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil,
and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings.
Alas, I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the misery I
imagined and dreaded I did not conceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was destined
to endure. It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva. The gates
of the town were already shut, and I was obliged to pass the night at Zecharon, a village at the
distance of Haffer League from the city. The sky was serene, and as I was unable to rest,
I resolved to visit the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not
pass through the town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at Plain Ballet.
During this short voyage, I saw the lightning playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most
beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and on landing, I ascended a low hill
that I might observe its progress. It advanced, the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the
rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased. I quitted my seat
and walked on, although the darkness and storm increased every minute and the thunder burst
with a terrific crash over my head. It was echoed from Salève, the Jures, and the Alps of Savoy.
Vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like
a vast sheet of fire. Then, for an instant, everything seemed of a pitchy darkness until
the eye recovered itself in the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in Switzerland,
appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. The most violent storm hung exactly north of the
town, over the part of the lake which lies between the promontory of Belle Rive and the village of
Coppet. Another storm enlightened Jure with faint flashes, and another darkened and sometimes
disclosed the mole, a peak mountain to the east of the lake. While I watched the tempests, so
beautiful that terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated
my spirits. I clasped my hands and exclaimed aloud, William, dear angel, this is thy funeral,
this is thy dirge. As I said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from
behind a clump of trees near me. I stood fixed, gazing intently. I could not be mistaken. A flash
of lightning illuminated the object and discovered its shape plainly to me, its gigantic stature,
and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs to humanity. Instantly informed
me that it was the wretch, the filthy demon to whom I had given life. What did he there? Could
he be, I shuddered the conception, the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my
imagination than I became convinced of its truth. My teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean
against a tree for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing
in human shape could have destroyed the fair child. He was the murderer, I could not doubt it. The
mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing the devil,
but it would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me, hanging among the rocks of
the nearly perpendicular ascent of Mount Salève, a hill that bounds Plain-Palais on the south. He
soon reached the summit and disappeared. I remained motionless. The thunder ceased,
but the rain still continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I
revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget. The whole train of my
progress towards the creation, the appearance of the works of my own hands at my bedside,
its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life,
and was this his first crime? Alas, I had turned loose into the world a depraved wretch,
whose delight was in carnage and misery. Had he not murdered my brother?
No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the night,
which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather.
My imagination was busy in scenes of evil and despair. I considered the being whom I had cast
among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror such as the
deity which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from
my grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me. Day dawned, and I directed my steps
towards the town. The gates were open, and I hastened to my father's house. My first thought
was to discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be made. But I paused
when I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A being whom I myself had formed and endued with
life had met me at midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. I remembered also the
nervous fever with which I had been seized just at that time that I had dated my creation, and which
would give an air of delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. I well knew that if any
other had communicated such a revelation to me, I would have looked upon it as the ravings of an
insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were
so far credited as to persuade my relatives to commence it, and then of what use would be pursuit,
who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont-Saleve. These
reflections determined me, and I resolved to remain silent. It was about five in the morning
when I entered my father's house. I told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into
the library to attend their usual hour of rising. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for
one indelible trace, and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father before my
departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and venerable parent, he still remained to me. I gazed on the
picture of my mother, which stood over the mantelpiece. It was an historical subject,
painted at my father's desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling
by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale, but there was an air
of dignity and beauty that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a
miniature of William, and my tears flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged,
Ernest entered. He had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me.
Welcome, my dearest Victor, said he. Ah, I wish you had come three months ago, and then you would
have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to us now to share a misery which nothing can
alleviate, yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune,
and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.
Poor William, he was our darling and our pride.
Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother's eyes. A sense of mortal agony crept over my frame.
Before, I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home. The reality came on me as a new
and not less terrible disaster. I tried to calm Ernest. I inquired more minutely concerning my
father, and her I named my cousin. She, most of all, said Ernest, requires consolation. She accused
herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched. But since the
murderer has been discovered... The murderer discovered? Good God, how can that be? Who could
attempt to pursue him? It is impossible. One might as well try to overtake the winds or combine a
I saw him too. He was free last night.
I do not know what you mean, replied my brother, in accents of wonder. But to us, the discovery we
have made completes our misery. No one would believe it at first, and even now Elizabeth will
not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz,
who was so amiable and fond of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful,
and so appalling a crime? Justine Moritz? Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is wrongfully.
Everyone knows that. No one believes it, surely, Ernest? No one did at first, but several
circumstances came out that have almost forced conviction upon us, and her own behaviour has
been so confused as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for
doubt. But she will be tried today, and you will then hear all.
He then related that, the morning on which the murderer of poor William had been discovered,
Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During this interval,
one of the servants, happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the murder,
had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the
temptation of the murderer. The servant instantly showed it to one of the others,
who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a magistrate, and upon their deposition,
Justine was apprehended, on being charged with the fact the poor girl confirmed the suspicion,
in a great measure, by her extreme confusion of manner. This was a strange tale, but it did not
shake my faith, and I replied earnestly, You are all mistaken. I know the murderer. Justine, poor,
Justine, is innocent. At that instant, my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on
his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully, and, after we had exchanged our
mournful greeting, would have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, had not
earnest exclaimed, Good God, Papa! Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of our poor
William. We do also, unfortunately, replied my father, for indeed I had rather have been
forever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so
highly. My dear father, you are mistaken. Justine is innocent. If she is, God forbid that she should
suffer as guilty. She is to be tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.
This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own mind that Justine, and indeed every human
being, was guiltless of this murder. I had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence
could be brought forward strong enough to convict her. My tale was not one to announce publicly.
A astounding horror would be looked upon as madness by the vulgar. Did anyone indeed exist,
except I, the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the existence of the
living monument of presumption and rash ignorance which I had left loose upon the world? We were
soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld her. It had endowed her with
loveliness, surpassing the beauty of her childish years. There was the same candour, the same vivacity,
but it was a lie to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect. She welcomed me with
Your arrival, my dear cousin, said she, fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some means to
justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas, who is safe if she can be convicted of crime? I rely on
her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard to us. We have not
only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl whom I sincerely love is to be torn away by
even a worth fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure
she will not, and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little William.
She is innocent, my Elizabeth, said I, and that shall be proved. Fear nothing, but let your spirits
be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal. How kind and generous you are! Everyone else believes
in her guilt, and that made me wretched, for I knew it was impossible, and to see everyone else
prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing. She wept. Dearest niece,
said my father, dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws
and the activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality.
recorded by Alex Foster, 15th of September, 2005, www.alexfoster.me.uk
We passed a few sad hours until eleven o'clock, when the trial was to commence.
My father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court.
During the whole of this wretched mockery of justice, I suffered living torture.
It was to be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of my fellow beings,
one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered,
with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy.
Now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the cause.
A thousand times rather would I have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine,
but I was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have been considered as the ravings of a madman,
and would not have exculpated her who suffered through me.
The appearance of Justine was calm. She was dressed in mourning, and her countenance, always engaging,
was rendered by the solemnity of her feelings exquisitely beautiful.
Yet she appeared confident in innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by thousands,
for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators
by the imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed.
She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained,
and as her confusion had before her been adduced as proof of her guilt,
she worked up in her mind to an appearance of courage.
When she entered the court, she threw her eyes round it, and quickly discovered where we were seated.
A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly recovered herself,
and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest her utter guiltlessness.
The trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the charge, several witnesses were called.
Several strange facts combined against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof of her innocence as I had.
She had been out the whole of the night on which the murder had been committed,
and towards morning had been perceived by a market woman not far from the spot
where the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found.
The woman asked her what she did there, but she looked very strangely,
and only returned a confused and unintelligible answer.
She returned to the house about eight o'clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night,
she replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly if anything had been heard concerning him.
When shown the body, she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days.
The picture was then produced, which the servant had found in her pocket,
and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the same which an hour before the child had been missed
she had placed around his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.
Justine was called on for her defence.
As the trial had proceeded, her countenance had halted.
Surprise, horror and misery were strongly expressed.
Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was desired to plead,
she collected her powers and spoke in an audible, though variable voice.
She then related that by the permission of Elizabeth,
she had passed the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed
at the house of an aunt at Shen, a village situated about a league from Geneva.
On her return at about nine o'clock, she said that she had been looking for the child,
She met a man who asked her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost.
She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him
when the gates of Geneva were shut and she was forced to remain several hours of the night in her barn
belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants to whom she was well known.
Most of the night she spent here watching.
Towards morning she believed that she slept for a few minutes.
Some steps disturbed her and she awoke.
It was dawn and she quitted her asylum that she might again endeavour to find my brother.
If she had gone near the spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge.
That she had been bewildered when questioned by the market woman was not surprising
since she had passed a sleepless night and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain.
Concerning the picture, she could give no account.
I know, continued the unhappy victim,
how heavily and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me.
But I have no power of explaining it, and when I have expressed my utter ignorance
I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed in my pocket.
But here also I am checked. I believe that I have no enemy on earth
and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me wantonly.
Did the murderer place it there? I know of no opportunity afforded him for so doing.
Or, if I had, why should he have stolen the jewel to part with it again so soon?
I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for hope.
I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my character
and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be condemned.
Although I would pledge my salvation on my innocence.
Several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and they spoke well of her.
But fear and hatred of the crime of which they supposed her guilty
rendered them timorous and unwilling to come forward.
Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct
about to fail the accused, when, although violently agitated,
she desired permission to address the court.
I am, said she, the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or rather his sister,
for I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before his birth.
It may therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion,
but when I see a fellow creature about to perish to the cowardice of her pretended friends,
I wish to be allowed to speak that I may say what I know of her character.
I am well acquainted with the accused.
I have lived in the same house with her at one time for five and at another for nearly two years.
During all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures.
She nursed Madame Frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness with the greatest affection and care,
and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness in a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her,
after which she again lived in my uncle's house where she was beloved by all the family.
She was warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a most affectionate mother.
For my own part I do not hesitate to say that notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her,
I believe and rely on her perfect innocence.
She had no temptation for such an action.
As to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had so earnestly desired it,
I should have willingly given it to her. So much do I esteem and value her.
A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth's simple and powerful appeal,
but it was excited by her generous interference and not in favour of poor Justine,
on whom the public indignation was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude.
She herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer.
My own agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial.
I believed in her innocence. I knew it.
Could the demon who had, I did not a minute doubt,
murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death in ignominy?
I could not sustain the horror of my situation,
and when I perceived that the popular voice and the countenances of the judge had already condemned my unhappy victim,
I rushed out of the court in agony.
The tortures of the accused did not equal mine.
She was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.
I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness.
In the morning I went to the court. My lips and throat were parched.
I dared not ask the fatal question, but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my visit.
The ballots had been thrown. They were all black, and Justine was condemned.
I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt.
I had before experienced sensations of horror,
and when I have endeavoured to bestow upon them adequate expressions,
but words cannot convey an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured.
The person to whom I addressed myself added that Justine had already confessed her guilt.
That evidence, he observed, was hardly required in so glaring a case,
but I am glad of it, and indeed none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence,
be it ever so decisive.
This was strange and unexpected intelligence. What could it mean?
Had my eyes deceived me, and was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be
if I disclosed the object of my suspicions?
I hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
My cousin, replied I, it is decided as you may have expected.
All judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty should escape.
But she has confessed.
This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon Justine's innocence.
Alas, said she, how shall I ever again believe in human goodness?
Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
Her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has committed a murder.
Soon after, we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my cousin.
My father wished her not to go, but said that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide.
Yes, said Elizabeth, I will go, although she is guilty, and you, Victor, shall accompany me.
I cannot go alone.
The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I could not refuse.
We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine sitting on some straw at the farther end.
Her hands were manacled, and her head rested on her knees.
She rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly.
My cousin wept also.
Oh, Justine, said she, why did you rob me of my last consolation?
I relied on your innocence, and although I was then very wretched, I was not so miserable as I am now.
And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked?
Do you also join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?
Her voice was suffocated with sobs.
Rise, my poor girl, said Elizabeth.
Why do you kneel if you are innocent?
I am not one of your enemies.
I believed you guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had yourself declared your guilt.
That report, you say, is false.
And be assured, dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment, but your own confession.
I did confess, but I confessed a lie.
I confessed that I might obtain absolution, but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins.
The God of heaven forgive me.
Ever since I was condemned, my confessor has besieged me.
He threatened and menaced until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he said I was.
He threatened excommunication and hellfire in my last moments if I continued obdurate.
Dear lady, I had none to support me.
All looked on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition.
What could I do?
In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie, and now only am I truly miserable.
She paused, weeping.
And then continued.
I thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honored and whom you loved,
was a creature capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
Dear William, dearest blessed child, I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy.
And that consoles me, going as I am to suffer ignominy and death.
Oh, Justine, forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
Why did you confess?
But do not mourn, dear girl, do not fear.
I will proclaim, I will prove your innocence, I will melt the stony hearts of your enemies by the tears and prayers.
You shall not die.
You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold?
No, I could never survive so horrible a misfortune.
Justine shook her head mournfully.
I do not fear to die, she said.
That pang is past.
God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the worst.
I leave a sad and bitter world, and if you remember me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the fate awaiting me.
Learn from me, dear lady, to submit impatience to the will of heaven.
During this conversation, I had retired to a corner of the prison room, where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me.
Despair? Who dared talk of that?
The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such deep and bitter agony.
I gnashed my teeth and ground them together, uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul.
Justine started.
When she saw who it was, she approached me and said,
Dear sir, you are very kind to visit you.
I do hope you do not believe that I am guilty.
I could not answer.
No, Justine, said Elizabeth.
He is more convinced of your innocence than I was, for even when he heard that you had confessed, he did not credit it.
I truly thank him.
In these last moments, I feel the sincerest gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness.
How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I am.
It removes more than half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.
Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself.
She indeed gained the resignation she desired.
But I, the true murderer, felt the never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or consolation.
Elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was the misery of innocence,
which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness.
Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart.
I bore a hell within me which nothing could extinguish.
We stayed several hours with Justine, and it was with great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear herself away.
I wish, cried she, that I were to die with you.
I cannot live in this world of misery.
Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty repressed her bitter tears.
She embraced Elizabeth and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion,
Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend.
May heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you.
May this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer.
Live and be happy, and make others so.
And on the morrow, Justine died.
Elizabeth's heart-rending eloquence failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the criminality of the saintly sufferer.
My passionate and indignant appeals were lost upon them,
and when I received their cold answers and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men,
my purposed avowal died away on my lips.
Thus I might proclaim myself a madman, but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim.
She perished on the scaffold as a murderess.
From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate the deep and voiceless grief of my Elizabeth.
This also was my doing, and my father's woe and the desolation of that late so smiling home
all was the work of my thrice accursed hands.
Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your last tears.
Again shall you rise the funeral wail, and the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard.
Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early much-loved friend,
he who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes,
who has no thought nor sense of joy, except as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances,
who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you,
he bids you weep, to shed countless tears,
happy beyond his hopes if thus inexorable fate be satisfied,
and if the destruction pours before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments.
Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror and despair,
I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and Justine,
the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.
9.
Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have been worked
up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows
and deprives the soul both of hope and fear. Justine died, she rested, and I was alive.
The blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my heart which
nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes. I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed
deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more, I persuaded myself, was yet
yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue. I had begun life with benevolent
intentions and thirsted for the moment when I should put them in practice and make myself
useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted. Instead of that serenity of conscience which
allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction and from thence to gather
promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt which hurried me away to a
hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of mind preyed upon my health
which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the
face of man. All sound of joy or complacency was tortured to me. Solitude was my only consolation,
deep, dark, death-like solitude. My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible
in my disposition and habits, and endeavored by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and awaken in me the courage
to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me. Do you think, Victor, said he, that I do not suffer
also? No one could love a child more than I loved your brother. Tears came into his eyes as he spoke.
But is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness?
By an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow
prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness without which no
man is fit for society. This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case. I
should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if remorse had not mingled its
bitterness and terror its alarm with my other sensations. Now I could only answer my father
with a look of despair and endeavor to hide myself from his view. About this time we retired to our
house at Belle Reve. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates
regularly at ten o'clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that hour had rendered
our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. I was now free. Often after the
rest of the family had retired for the night I took the boat and passed many hours upon the water.
Sometimes with my sail set I was carried by the wind and sometimes after rowing it into the middle
of the lake I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections.
I was often tempted when all was at peace around me and I the only unquiet thing that
wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly. If I accept some bat or the
frogs whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore. Often
I say I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake that the waters might close over me and
my calamities forever. But I was restrained when I thought of the heroic and suffering
Elizabeth whom I tenderly loved and whose existence was bound up in mine. I thought
also of my father and surviving brother should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and
unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose among them. At these moments I
wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my mind only that I might afford them consolation
and happiness but that could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. I had been the author
of unalterable evils and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had created should
perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure feeling that all was not over and that he would
still commit some signal crime which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection
of the past. There was always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained behind.
My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes
became inflamed and I ardently wished to extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed.
When I reflected on his crimes and malice my hatred and revenge burst all bounds of
I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes could I when there have
precipitated him to their base. I wished to see him again that I might wreak the utmost extent
of abhorrence on his head and avenge the deaths of William and Justine. Our house was the house
of mourning. My father's health was deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was
sad and desponding. She no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations. All pleasure seemed to
her sacrilege toward the dead. Eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she
should pay to innocents so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature who in
earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future
prospects. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her and
its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles. When I reflect my dear cousin said she, on the
miserable death of Justine Moritz I no longer see the world and its works as they before appeared
to me. Before I looked upon the accounts of vice and injustice that I read in books or heard from
others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils. At least they were remote and more familiar to
the imagination. But now misery has come home and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for
each other's blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty
and if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered assuredly she would have been
the most apraved of human creatures. For the sake of a few jewels to have murdered the son of her
benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth and appeared to love as it had been
her own? I could not consent to the death of any human being but certainly I should have thought
such a creature unfit to remain in the society of men. But she was innocent. I know, I feel,
she was innocent. You are of the same opinion and that confirms me. Alas! Victor, when falsehood can
look so like the truth, who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as if I were walking
on the edge of a precipice towards which thousands are crowding and endeavoring to plunge me into the
William and Justine were assassinated and the murderer escapes. He walks about the world free
and perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same crimes,
I would not change places with such a wretch. I listened to this discourse with the extremist
agony. I, not indeed, but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth read my anguish in my
countenance and, kindly taking my hand, said, My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These
events have affected me, God knows how deeply, but I am not so wretched as you are. There is an
expression of despair and sometimes of revenge in your countenance that makes me tremble. Dear
Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the friends around you who center all their hopes in
you. Have we lost the power of rendering you happy? Ah, while we love, while we are true to
each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native country, we may reap every
tranquil blessing. What can disturb our peace? And could not such words from her whom I fondly
prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my heart?
Even as she spoke I drew near to her as if in terror lest at that very moment the destroyer
had been near to rob me of her. Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth,
nor of heaven could redeem my soul from woe. The very accents of love were ineffectual. I
was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial influence could penetrate. The wounded deer
dragging its fainting limbs to some untrodden break there to gaze upon the arrow which had
pierced it and to die was but a type of me. Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair
that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily
exercise and by change of place, some relief for my intolerable sensations. It was during an access
of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near alpine valleys,
sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral because
human sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamonix. I had visited
it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had passed since then. I was a wreck, but not had
changed in those savage and enduring scenes. I performed the first part of my journey on horseback.
I afterwards hired a mule as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive injury on these rugged
roads. The weather was fine. It was about the middle of the month of August, nearly two months
after the death of Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe. The weight upon my
spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the ravine of Arves. The immense mountains
and precipices that overhung me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks,
and the dashing of the waterfalls around, spoke of a power mighty as omnipotence. And I ceased to
hear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements,
here displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed
a more magnificent and astonishing character. Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of
piney mountains, the impetuous arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from among the
trees formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty
Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all as belonging to another earth,
the habitations of another race of beings. I passed the bridge of Polissier, where the ravine,
which the river forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that overhangs it.
Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamonix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime,
but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed.
The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw no more ruined castles
and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road. I heard the rumbling thunder of the
marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, raised
itself from the surrounding aghiles, and its tremendous dome overlooked the valley.
A tingling, long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this journey. Some turn in the
road, some new object suddenly perceived and recognized reminded me of days gone by and were
associated with the light-hearted gaiety of boyhood. The very winds whispered in soothing
accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no more. Then again the kindly influence ceased
to act. I found myself fettered again to grief and indulging in all the misery of reflection.
Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all
myself. Or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on the grass,
weighed down by horror and despair. At length I arrived to the village of Chamonix. Exhaustion
succeeded to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured. For a short space of
time I remained at the window, watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc,
and listening to the rushing of the arve which pursued its noisy way beneath. The same lulling
sounds acted as a lullaby to my two keen sensations. When I placed my head upon my pillow,
sleep crept over me. I felt it as it came and blessed the giver of oblivion.
X.
I spent the following day roaming through the valley.
I stood beside the sources of the Arviron, which take their rise in a glacier that,
with slow pace, is advancing down from the summit of the hills to barricade the valley.
The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before me. The icy wall of the glacier overhung me.
A few shattered pines were scattered around, and the solemn silence of this glorious presence
chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment.
The thunder sound of the avalanche or the cracking reverberated along the mountains
of the accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in their hands.
These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was capable
of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
grief, they subdued and tranquilized it. In some degree, also, they diverted my mind from the
thoughts over which it had brooded for the last month. I retired to rest at night, my slumbers,
as it were, waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I had contemplated
during the day. They congregated round me. The unstained snowy mountaintop, the glittering
pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the eagle soaring amidst the clouds,
they all gathered round me and bade me be at peace.
Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke? All of soul and spiriting fled with sleep,
and dark melancholy clouded every thought. The rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists
hid the summits of the mountains, so that I even saw not the faces of those mighty friends.
Still I would penetrate their misty vale and seek them in their cloudy retreats.
What were rain and storm to me? My mule was brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend
to the summit of Mont-en-Vert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever
moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it. It had then filled me with a
sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light
and joy. The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect of
solemnizing my mind and causing me to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to go without
a guide, for I was well acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
windings which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the mountain. It is a
scene terrifically desolate. In a thousand spots the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived,
where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon other trees.
The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines of snow down which stones continually
roll from above. One of them is particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even
speaking in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction upon the
speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are somber and add an air of severity to the
scene. I looked on the valley beneath. Vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran through it
and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform
clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received
from the objects around me. Alas, why does man boast of sensibility superior to those apparent
in the brute? It only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger,
thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free. But now we are moved by every wind that blows
and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to us. We rest. A dream has power to
sleep. We rise. One wandering thought pollutes the day. We feel, conceive, or reason, laugh,
or weep, embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away. It is the same, for be it joy or sorrow,
the path of its departure still is free. Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow,
not may endure but mutability. It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent.
For some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice.
A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated the
cloud and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves
of a troubled sea, descending low and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is
almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The opposite mountain
is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I now stood Mont-en-Bert was exactly opposite
at the distance of a league, and above it rose Mont Blanc in awful majesty. I remained in a
recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. The sea, or rather the vast
river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains, whose aerial summits hung over its recesses.
Their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. My heart,
which was before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy. I exclaimed,
wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander and do not rest in your narrow beds,
allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life.
As I said this, I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance,
advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded over the crevices in the ice,
among which I had walked with caution. His stature, also, as he approached,
seemed to exceed that of man. I was troubled. A mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness
seize me, but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I perceived,
as the shape came nearer, sight tremendous and abhorred, that it was the wretch whom I had created.
I trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him
in mortal combat. He approached. His countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and
malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I
only recovered to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt.
Devil, I exclaimed, do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm
wreaked on your miserable head? Be gone, vile insect, or rather stay that I may trample you
to dust, and owe that I could, with the extinction of your miserable existence,
restore those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered.
I expected this reception, said the demon.
All men hate the wretched. How then must I be hated,
who am miserable beyond all living things? Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me,
thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissolvable by the annihilation of one of us.
You purpose to kill me? How dare you sport thus with life?
Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind.
If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and you at peace. But if you refuse,
I will glut the maw of death until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.
Abhorred monster, fiend that thou art, the tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes.
Wretched devil, you reproach me with your creation. Come on, then, that I may extinguish
the spark which I so negligently bestowed. My rage was without bounds. I sprang on him,
impelled by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.
He easily eluded me and said,
Be calm. I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head.
Have I not suffered enough that you seek to increase my misery?
Life, although it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it.
Remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself. My height is superior to thine,
my joints more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee.
I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and docile to my natural lord and king,
if thou wilt also perform thy part, the which thou owest me.
O Frankenstein, be not equitable to every other and trample upon me alone,
to whom thy justice and even thy clemency and affection is most due.
Remember that I am thy creature. I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel,
whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss from which I alone
am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good. Misery made me a fiend. Make me happy,
and I shall again be virtuous. Be gone. I will not hear you. There can be no community
between you and me. We are enemies. Be gone, or let us try our strength in a fight in which one
must fall. How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favorable eye upon thy
creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent. My
not alone, miserably alone. You, my creator, abhor me. What hope can I gather from your fellow
creatures who owe me nothing? They spurn and hate me. The desert mountains and dreary glaciers are
my refuge. I have wandered here many days. The caves of ice, which I only do not fear,
are a dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not grudge.
These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder to me than your fellow beings.
If the multitude of mankind knew of my existence, they would do as you do and arm themselves for
my destruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no terms with my enemies.
I am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness. Yet it is in your power to
recompense me and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great
that not only you and your family, but thousands of others shall be swallowed up in the whirlwinds
rage. Let your compassion be moved, and do not disdain me. Listen to my tale. When you have
heard that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The guilty are
allowed by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in their own defense before they are condemned.
Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied
conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man. Yet I ask you not to
spare me. Listen to me, and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.
Why do you call to my remembrance, I rejoined, circumstances of which I shudder to reflect,
that I have been the miserable origin and author. Cursed be the day, abhorred devil,
in which few first saw light. Cursed, although I curse myself, be the hands that formed you.
You have made me wretched beyond expression. You have left me no power to consider whether
I am just to you or not. Be gone! Relieve me from the death of my own son.
The sight of your detested form.
Thus I relieve thee, my creator, he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes,
which I flung from me with violence. Thus I take from thee a sight which you abhor.
Still thou canst listen to me, and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed,
I demand this from you. Hear my tale. It is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is
not fitting to your fine sensations. Come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the
heavens. Before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world,
you will have heard my story and can decide. On you it rests whether I quit forever the
neighborhood of man and lead a harmless life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures
and the author of your own speedy ruin. As he said this, he led the way across the ice.
I followed. My heart was full, and I did not answer him. But as I proceeded, I weighed the
various arguments that he had used, and determined at least to listen to his tale.
I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution.
I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation
or denial of this opinion. For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator towards
his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy before I complained of his wickedness.
These motives urged me to comply with his demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the
rock. The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend. We entered the hut, the fiend with an
air of exultation, I with a heavy heart and depressed spirits. But I consented to listen,
and seating myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began his tale.
It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original error of my being. All the events
of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations sees me,
and I saw, felt, heard, and smelled at the same time. And it was, indeed, a long time before I
learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. By degrees I remember a
shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me, and troubled me. But hardly had I felt this when,
by opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light poured in upon me again. I walked,
and I believed, descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight. But I now
found that I could wander on at liberty with no obstacles, which I could not surmount or avoid.
The light became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearing me as I walked,
I sought a place where I could receive shade. This was the forest near Ingolstadt. And here
I lay by the side of a brook, resting from my fatigue until I felt tormented by hunger and
thirst. This roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I had found
hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. I slacked my thirst at the brook, and then lying
down was overcome by sleep. It was dark when I awoke. I felt cold also, and half frightened,
as it were instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment
on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some clothes. But these were insufficient
to secure me from the dews of night. I was poor, helpless, miserable wench. I knew and
could distinguish nothing. But feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down and wept.
Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of pleasure. I stared up
and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees. The moon. I gazed with a kind of wonder.
It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries.
I was still cold when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with which I covered myself
and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind. I was confused. I felt light
and hunger and thirst and darkness, innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on all sides various
scents saluted me. The only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my
eyes on that with pleasure. Several changes of the day and night passed, and the orb of night
had greatly lessened when I began to distinguish my sensations from each other. I gradually saw
plainly the clear stream that supplied me with drink and the trees that shaded me with their
foliage. I was delighted when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my
ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals, who had often interpreted the
light, intercepted the light from my eyes. I also began to observe with greater accuracy the forms
that surrounded me, and to perceive the boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me.
Sometimes I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds, but was unable. Sometimes I wished
to express my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from
me frightened me into silence again. The moon had disappeared from the night and again with a
lessened form showed itself while I still remained in the forest. My sensations had by this time
become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to
the light and to perceive objects in their right forms. I distinguished the insect from the herb,
and by degrees one herb from another. I found that the sparrow uttered none but the harshest
tones whilst those of the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing. One day when I was
cold I found a fire which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with the light
at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers,
but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same
cause should produce such opposite effects. I examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy
found it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
and would not burn. I was pained at this, and sat still watching the operation of the fire.
The wet wood which I had placed near the heat dried in itself become inflamed. I reflected on
this, and by touching the various branches I discovered the cause and busied myself in
collecting a great quantity of wood that I might dry it and have a plentiful supply of fire. When
I came on and brought sleep with it I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished.
I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it, and then,
spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank into sleep. It was morning when I awoke,
and my first care was to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly
fanned it into flame. I observed this also, and contrived the fan of branches which roused the
embers when they were nearly extinguished. When night came again I found with pleasure
that the fire gave light as well as heat, and that the discovery of this element was useful
to me and my food, for I found that some of the ovals that the travelers had left had been
roasted and tasted much more savory than the berries I gathered from the trees. I tried
therefore to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found the
berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
Food, however, became scarce, and I often spent the whole day searching in vain for a few acorns
to assuage the pangs of hunger. When I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied.
In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of fire which I had obtained through accident,
and knew not how to reproduce it. I gave several hours to the serious consideration of this
difficulty, but I was obliged to relinquish all supply, all attempt to supply it, and wrapping
myself in my cloak, I had struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three days in
these rambles, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place the
night before, and the fields were of one uniform white. The appearance was discolored, and I found
my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground. It was about seven in the
morning, and I longed to obtain food and shelter. At length I perceived a small hut on a rising
ground which had doubtlessly been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a new sight
to me, and I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered.
An old man sat in it near a fire over which he was preparing his breakfast.
He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut,
ran across the field with the speed of which his debilitated form hardly seemed capable.
His appearance differed from any I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me,
but I was enchanted by the appearance of the hut. Here the snow and rain could not penetrate.
The ground was dry, and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as pandemonium
appeared to the demons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily
devoured the remnants of the shepherd's breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine.
The latter, however, I did not like. Then, overcome by fatigue, I lay down among some straw
and fell asleep. It was noon when I awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which shone
brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my travels, and thus depositing the
remains of the peasant breakfast and wallet I found. I proceeded across the fields for several
hours until, at sunset, I arrived at a village. How miraculous did this appear! The huts, the
neater cottages, the stately houses engaged my admiration by turns. The vegetables in the garden,
the milk and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of the cottages allured my
appetite. One of the best of these I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within the door before
children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused, some fled, some
attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to
the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretched
appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the village. This hovel, however, joined a cottage
of neat and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience I dared not enter it.
My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could enter it I could with difficulty
sit upright in it. No wood, however, was placed on the earth which formed the floor, but it was dry,
and although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from the
snow and rain. Here, then, I retreated and laid down to have, happy to have found a shelter,
however miserable from the inclementcy of the season and still more from the barbarity of man.
As soon as morning dawned I crept from my kennel that I might view the adjacent cottage and
discover if it could remain in the habitation I had found. It was situated against the back of
cottage and surrounded on both sides, on the sides which were exposed by a pigsty and a clear
pool of water. One part was open, and by that I had crept in, but now I covered every crevice by
which I might be perceived with stone and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move on the
occasion to pass out, all the light I enjoyed came through the sty and that was sufficient for me.
Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeting it with clean straw, I retired,
for I saw the figure of a man in the distance, and I remembered too well my treatment the night before
to trust myself in his power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for the day
by a loaf of coarse bread which I purloined and a cup from which I drank more conveniently than
my hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little raised so that
it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm.
Thus being provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel until something should occur
which might alter my determination. It was indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest,
my former residence, and the rain-dropping branches and dank earth. I ate my breakfast
with pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little water when I heard a step,
and looking through a small chink I beheld a young creature with a pail on her head passing
before my hovel. The girl was young and of gentle demeanor, unlike what I have since found cottagers
and farm house servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a coarse blue petticoat, and a linen
jacket being her only garb. Her fair hair was plaited but not adorned. She looked patient yet
sad. I had lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing the pail
which was now partially filled with milk. As she walked along, seemingly uncommon by the burden,
a young man met her, whose countenance expressed a deeper despondence. Uttering a few sounds with
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the cottage himself.
She followed and they disappeared. Presently I saw the young man again with some tools in his hand
across the field behind the cottage, and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house,
sometimes in the yard. On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the cottage
had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been filled up with wood,
and one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye
could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean,
but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on
his hands in a disconsolid attitude. The young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage,
but presently she took something out of a drawer which employed her hands, and she sat beside the
old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice
of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch, who had never
beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager
won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet,
mournful air which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion,
of which the old man took no notice until she sobbed audibly. Then he pronounced a few sounds,
and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such
kindness and affection that I felt sensations of a particular and overpowering nature.
They were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had never before expressed, experienced,
from either hunger or cold, warmth nor food, and I withdrew from the window, unable to bear these
emotions. Soon after, the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood.
The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and, taking some of the fuel
into the cottage, placed it on the fire. Then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the
cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased and went
into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water and then upon the fire.
Afterward, she continued her work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been employed thus about an hour,
the young woman joined him, and they entered the cottage together.
The old man had in the meantime been pensive, but on the appearance of his companions,
he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched.
The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, and the old man walked before the
cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in
beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old with silver hairs and
accountants beaming with benevolence and love. The younger was slight and graceful in his figure,
and his features were molded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed
utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the cottage, and the youth,
with tools different from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the fields.
Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found the cottagers had a means of prolonging
light by the use of tapirs, and was delighted to find that in the setting of the sun did not
put an end to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbors. In the evening,
the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations, which I did not understand,
and the old man again took up the instrument, which produced the divine sounds that enchanted
me in the morning. As soon as he had finished, the youth began not to play, but to utter sounds that
were monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony of the old man's instrument, nor the
songs of the birds, I since found out that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the
words or letters. The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time,
extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.
I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep.
I thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these
people, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered
the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might
hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would remain quietly in my hobble,
watching and endeavoring to discover the motives which influenced their actions.
The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The young woman arranged the cottage and
prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal. This day was passed in the same
routine as that which preceded it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors,
and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to
be blind, enjoyed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could
exceed the love and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable
companion. They performed towards him every little office of attention and duty with gentleness,
and he rewarded them with his benevolent smiles. They were not entirely happy. The young man and
his companion often went apart and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness,
but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange
that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings
unhappy? They possessed a delightful house, for which it was in my eyes, and every luxury.
They had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands when hungry.
They were dressed in excellent clothes, and still more, they enjoyed one another's company and
speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they
really express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention
and time explained to me many appearances which were first enigmatic. A considerable period
elapsed before I discovered one of the causes of the uneasiness of this amenable family.
It was poverty, and they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree.
Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of one
cow, which gave very little during the winter when its masters could scarcely procure food to
support it. They often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the
two younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old man when they reserved
none for themselves. This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed during the night
to steal a part of their store for my own consumption, but when I found that in doing
this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots,
which I gathered from a neighboring wood. I also discovered another means through which I was
enabled to insist their labors. I found that the youth spent a great part of each day in collecting
wood for the family fire, and during the night I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly
discovered, and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days. I remember
the first time I did this. The young woman, when she opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly
astonished on seeing such a great pile of wood on the outside. She uttered some words in a loud
voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. I observed with pleasure that he did not
go into the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden.
By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these people possessed the
method of communicating their experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds.
I perceived that the words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain,
smiles or sadness in the minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a god-like science,
and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it, but I was baffled in every attempt I made for
its purpose. Their pronunciation was quick, and the words they uttered, not having any apparent
connection with visible objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could unravel the
mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having remained during the
space of several revolutions of the moon in my hobble, I discovered the names that were given
to some of the most familiar objects of discourse. I learned and applied the words fire, milk, bread,
and wood. I learned the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion had each
of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was father. The girl was called sister,
or Agatha, and the youth Felix, brother, or son. I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned
the ideas appropriated to each of these sounds and was able to pronounce them. I distinguished
several other words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as good, dearest,
unhappy. I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and beauty of the cottagers
greatly endeared them to me. When they were unhappy, I felt depressed. When they rejoiced,
I sympathized in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other happened
under the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced me to the superior
accomplishments of my friends. The old man, I could perceive, often endeavored to encourage
his children, as sometimes I found that he called to them to cast off their melancholy.
He would talk in a cheerful accent, and the expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
upon me. Agatha listened with respect. Her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavored
to wipe away unperceived, but I found, generally found, that her countenance and tone were more
cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus with Felix. He was
always the saddest of the group, and even to my unpracticed senses he appears to have suffered
more deeply than his friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful
of that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man.
I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight,
marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried
with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy
ground. Early in the morning, before she had risen, he had cleared away the snow that obstructed her
path to the milk house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse,
where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand.
In the day, I believed, he worked sometimes for a neighboring farmer, because he often went forth
and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times, he worked in the
garden, but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and Agatha.
This reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees I discovered that he uttered many
of the same sounds when he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the
paper signs for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend these also.
But how was that possible when I did not even understand the sounds for which they stood as
signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow any kind
of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavor, for I easily perceived,
although I eagerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, I ought not make to the attempt
until I at first become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them
overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to
my eyes had made me acquainted. I admired the perfect forms of my cottagers, their grace,
beauty, and delicate complexions, but how I was terrified when I viewed myself in the transparent
pool. At first I stared back, unable to believe that it was indeed I who reflected in the mirror,
and when I became fully convinced that I was in reality the monster that I am,
I was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
Alas, I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity.
As the sun became warmer and the light of the day longer, the snows vanished, and I beheld
the bare trees and black earth. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving
indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, after which I found, was coarse,
but it was wholesome, and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants
sprang up in the garden, which they dressed, and these signs of comfort increased daily
as the season advanced. The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon when it did not
rain, and I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took
place, but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it
had been. My mode of life and my hobble was uniform. During the morning I attended the
motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in various occupations I slept.
The remainder of the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to rest,
if there was any moon or the night was starlight, I went to the woods and collected my own food
and fuel for the cottage. When I returned as often as it was necessary, I cleared their path
the snow and performed those offices that I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these
labors, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them, and once or twice I heard them
on these occasions utter the words, good spirit, wonderful, but I did not then understand the
signification of these terms. My thoughts now become more active, and I long to discover the
motives and feelings of these lovely creatures. I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so
miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought, foolish wrench, that it might be in my power to restore
happiness to these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the venerable blind
father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix flitted before me. I looked upon them as superior
beings who would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a thousand
pictures of presenting myself to them and their gentle reception of me. I imagined that they would
be disgusted until, by my gentle demeanor and conciliating words, I should first win their favor
and afterwards their love. These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with fresh
to the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh but supple, and although my
voice was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood
with tolerable ease. It was as the ass and the lap dog, yet surely the gentle ass whose intentions
were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and excretion.
The pleasant showers and gentle warmth of spring greatly altered the aspect of the earth. Men who
before this change seemed to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in
various arts of cultivation. The birds sang in more cheerful tones and the leaves began to bud
forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth. Fit habitation for gods, which so short a time before
was bleak, damp, and unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enhancing appearance of nature.
The past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil,
and the future guided by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.
I now hasten to the more moving part of my story.
I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had been, had made
me what I am. Spring advanced rapidly and the weather became fine and the skies cloudless.
It surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom
with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. My senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand
scents of delight and a thousand sights of beauty. It was on one of these days when my
cottagers periodically rested from labor, the old man played on his guitar and the children listened
to him, that I observed the countenance of Felix was melancholy beyond expression. He sighed
frequently and once his father paused in his music and I conjectured by his manner that he
the cause of the son's sorrow. Felix replied in a cheerful accent and the old man was recommencing
his music when someone tapped at the door. It was a lady on horseback accompanied by a countryman
as a guide. The lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black veil. Agatha asked
a question to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing in a sweet accent the name of Felix.
Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends.
On hearing this word Felix came up hastily to the lady who when she saw him threw up her veil
and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of shining raven black and
curiously braided. Her eyes were dark but gentle though animated. Her features of a regular
proportion and her complexion wondrously fair each cheek tingled with a lovely pink.
Felix sometimes ravaged with delight when he saw her. Every trait of sorrow vanished from his face
and it instantly expressed a degree of ecstatic joy of which I could hardly have believed capable.
His eyes sparkled as his cheeks flushed with pleasure and at that moment I thought of him
as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings wiping a few
tears from her lovely eyes. She held her hand out to Felix who kissed it rapturously
and called her as well as I could distinguish his sweet Abraham. She did not appear to understand
him but smiled. He assisted her to dismount and dismissing her guide conducted her into the
cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father and the young stranger now
at the old man's feet and would have kissed his hand but he raised her and embraced her affectionately.
I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered the articulate sounds and soon appeared
to have a language of her own she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers.
They made many signs which I did not comprehend and I saw that her presence diffused gladness
through the cottage dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mist. Felix
seemed particularly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Abraham. Agatha the ever
gentle Agatha kissed the hands of the lovely stranger and pointing to her brother made signs
which appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came. Some hours passed thus
while they by their countenances expressed joy the cause of which I did not comprehend.
Presently I found by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them
that she was endeavoring to learn their language and the idea instantly occurred to me that I
should make use of the same instructions to the same end. The stranger learned about 20 words at
the first lesson most of them indeed were those which I had before understood but I profited by
others. As night came on Agatha and the and the Arabian retired early when they separated Felix
kissed the hand of the stranger and said good night sweet Safi. He sat up much longer conversing with
his father and by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the
subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to understand them and bent every faculty towards
that purpose but found it utterly impossible. The next morning Felix went out to his work
and after the usual occupations of Agatha were finished the Arabian sat at the feet of the old
man and taking his guitar played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once
drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes. She sang and her voice flowed with a rich cadence
swelling or dying like a night night like a nightingale of the woods. When she had finished
she gave the guitar to Agatha who at first declined it. She played a simple air and her
voice accompanied it in sweet accents but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger
the old man appeared enraptured and said some words with Agatha endeavored to explain to Safi
and by which he appeared to wish to express that she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her
music. The days now passed as peacefully as before with the sole alteration that joy had
taken place of sadness and accountances of my friends. Safi was always gay and happy.
She and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of language so that in two months I began to
comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors. In the meanwhile also the black
ground was covered with herbage and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers
sweet to the scent and the eyes stars of pale radiance among the moonlit woods. The sun became
warmer the nights clear and balmy and my nocturnal ramblers rambles were an extreme pleasure to me
although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun
for I never ventured abroad during daylight fearful of meeting with the same treatment
I had formerly endured at the first village which I entered.
My days were spent in close attention that I might more speedily master the language
and that I may boast and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian
who understood very little and conversed in broken accents whilst I comprehended and can
imitate almost every word that was spoken. While I improved in speech I also learned the science of
letters as it was taught to the stranger and this opened before me a wide range of words
a wide field for wonder and delight. The book from which Felix instructed Safi was Volney's
Ruins of Empires. I should not have understood the purport of this book had not Felix in reading it
gave very minute explanations. He had chosen this work he said because the
the clamatory style was framed in imitation of the eastern authors though this work I obtained
through this work I obtained a curious knowledge of history and a view of the several empires at
present existing in the world. It gave me an insight into the manners governments and religions
of the different nations of the earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics of the
stupendous genius and mental activity of the Grecians of the war and wondrous virtue of the
chivalry Christianity and kings. I heard of the discovery of the American hemisphere
and wept with Safi over the hapless fate of its of its original inhabitants.
These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings was man indeed at once so powerful so
virtuous and magnificent yet so vicious and base. He appeared at one time the mere scion of evil
of the evil principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and godlike.
To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honor that can befall a sensitive being.
To be based and vicious as many on record have been appeared the lowest
degration a condition more object that than that of the blind mole or harmless worm.
For a long time I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow
or even why there were laws and governments but when I heard details of the vice and bloodshed
my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and loathing. Every conversation of the cottagers
now opened new wonders to me. While I listened to the instructors instructions with Felix bestowed
upon the Arabian the strange system of human society was explained to me. I heard of the division
of property of immense wealth and squalid poverty of rank descent and noble blood.
The words introduced me to turn towards myself. I learned that the possessions most esteemed by
your fellow creatures were high and unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be
respected with only one of these advantages but without either he was considered except in very
rare instances as a vagabond and a slave doomed to waste his powers for the profits of the chosen
few. And what was I of my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant but I knew that I possess
no money no friends no kind of property. I was beside endured with a hideously figured a figure
hideously deformed and lonesome. I was not even the same nature as man. I was more agile than they
and could subsist on upon a coarser diet. I bore the extremities of heat and coal with less injury
to my frame and my stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked around I saw and heard of none like
me. Was I then a monster a blot upon the earth from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?
I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me.
I tried to dispel them but sorrow only increased with knowledge. Oh that I had forever remained
in my native wood nor known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger thirst and heat.
Of what a strange nature is knowledge it clings to the mind when it is once seized on it like a light
on a rock. I had sometimes wished to shake off all thought and feeling but I learned that it
was only one means to overcome the sensation of pain and that was death a state of which I feared
yet did not understand. I admired virtue and good feelings and loved the gentle manners and admirable
qualities of my cottagers but I was shut off from the intercourse with them except through means
which I obtained by stealth when I was unseen and unknown which rather increased than satisfied
the desire I had of becoming one of my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha and the animated smiles
of the charming Arabian were not for me. The mild exhortations of the old man and the lively
conversation of the loved Felix were not for me. Miserable unhappy wrench.
Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of the differences between the
sexes and the birth and growth of children. How the father doted on the smiles of the infant
and the lively sallies of the older child. How all life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in
precious charge. How the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge of brother sister and all
various relationships which bind one human being to another in mutual bonds. But where were my
friends in relations? No father had watched my infant days. No mother had blessed me with smiles
or caresses. Nor if they had all my past life was now a blot a blind vacancy in which I distinguished
nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then was in height and proportion.
I had never yet seen a being resembling me or who claimed any intercourse with me. What was I?
The question returned only to be answered with groans. I will soon explain to what those feelings
tended but allow me to return to the cottagers whose story excited me in such various feeling
of indignation delight and wonder but which all terminated in innocent love and reverence for my
protectors. For so I loved in an innocent half painful self-deceit to call them.
Some time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends.
It was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it
did in a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced
as I was.
The name of the old man was De Lacey.
He was descended from a good family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence,
respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals.
His son was bred in the service of his country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest
distinction.
A few months before my arrival, they had lived in a large and luxurious city called Paris,
surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect
or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.
The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin.
He was a Turkish merchant, and had inhabited Paris for many years, when for some reason
which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government.
He was seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from Constantinople
to join him.
He was tried and condemned to death.
The injustice of his sentence was very flagrant.
All Paris was indignant, and it was judged that his religion and wealth, rather than
the crime alleged against him, had been the cause of his condemnation.
Felix had accidentally been present at the trial.
His horror and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the court.
He made at that moment a solemn vow to deliver him, and then looked around for the means.
After many fruitless attempts to gain admittance to the prison, he found a strongly graded
window in an unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate
Mohammedan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of the barbarous
sentence.
Felix visited the great at night, and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his
favor.
The Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavored to rekindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises
of reward and wealth.
Felix rejected his offers with contempt.
Yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father, and who by her
gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind
that the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.
The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made on the heart of
Felix, and endeavored to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand
in marriage so soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety.
Felix was too delicate to accept this offer, yet he looked forward to the probability of
the event as to the consummation of his happiness.
During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant,
the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who
her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant of her
father who understood French.
She thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services toward her parent, and
at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.
I have copies of these letters, for I found means during my residence in the hovel to
procure implements of writing, and the letters were often in the hands of Felix or Agatha.
Before I depart, I will give them to you.
They will prove the truth of my tale.
But at present, as the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat
the substance of them to you.
Safi related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave by the Turks.
Recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of the father of Safi, who married her.
The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom,
spurned the bondage to which she was now reduced.
She instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion, and taught her to aspire
to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers
of Muhammad.
This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safi, who sickened
at the prospect of again returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of a harem,
allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements ill-suited to the temper of her
soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue.
The prospect of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take
rank in society was enchanting to her.
The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the night previous to it, he
quitted his prison and before morning was distant many leagues from Paris.
Felix had procured passports in the name of his father, sister and himself.
He had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting
his house under the pretense of a journey, and concealed himself with his daughter in
an obscure part of Paris.
Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyon and across Mount Sinis to Leghorn,
where the merchant had decided to wait a favorable opportunity of passing into some part of the
Turkish dominions.
Safi resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his departure, before which
time the Turk renewed his promise that she should be united to his deliverer, and Felix
remained with them in expectation of that event.
And in the meantime, he enjoyed the society of the Arabian, who exhibited toward him the
simplest and tenderest affection.
They conversed with one another through the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with
the interpretation of looks, and Safi sang to him the divine aires of her native country.
The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes of the youthful lovers,
while in his heart he had formed far other plans.
He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the
resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power
of his deliverer if he should choose to betray him to the Italian state which they inhabited.
He revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled to prolong the deceit until it
might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed.
His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris.
The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of their victim, and spared
no pains to detect and punish his deliverer.
The plot of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacy and Agatha were thrown into prison.
The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure.
His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed
the free air and the society of her whom he loved.
This idea was torture to him.
He quickly arranged with the Turk that if the latter should find a favorable opportunity
for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safi should remain as a border at a convent
in Leghorn, and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to Paris and delivered
himself up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacy and Agatha by this proceeding.
He did not succeed.
They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of which
deprived them of their fortune and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native
country.
They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them.
Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk for whom he and his family endured such unheard
of oppression on discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin, became
a traitor to good feeling and honor, and had quitted Italy with his daughter, insultingly
sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.
Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and rendered him, when I first saw
him, the most miserable of his family.
He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the mead of his virtue,
he gloried in it.
But the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss of his beloved safety were misfortunes more
bitter and irreparable.
The arrival of the Arabian now infused new life into his soul.
When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived of his wealth and rank, the merchant
commanded his daughter to think no more of her lover but to prepare to return to her
native country.
The generous nature of safety was outraged by this command, she attempted to expostulate
with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate.
A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter's apartment and told her hastily that he had
reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn had been divulged, and he should speedily
be delivered up to the French government.
He had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should
sail in a few hours.
He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow
at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn.
When alone, safety resolved in her own mind, the plan of conduct that it would become her
to pursue in this emergency.
A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her.
Her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it.
By some papers of her father which fell into her hands, she heard of the exile of her lover,
and learnt the name of the spot where he then resided.
She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination.
Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her, and a sum of money, she quitted Italy
with an attendant, a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey,
and departed for Germany.
She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of De Lacey, when
her attendant felt dangerously ill.
Safety nursed her with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the Arabian was
left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country, and utterly ignorant of the
customs of the world.
She fell, however, into good hands.
The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which they were bound, and after
her death the woman of the house in which they lived took care that safety should arrive
in safety at the cottage of her lover.
Such was the history of my beloved cottagers.
It impressed me deeply.
I learned from the views of social life which it developed to admire their virtues and to
deprecate the vices of mankind.
As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and generosity were ever present
before me, inciting within me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so
many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed.
But in giving an account of the progress of my intellect I must not omit a circumstance
which occurred in the beginning of the month of August of the same year.
One night during my accustomed visit to the neighboring woods where I collected my own
food and brought home firing for my protectors, I found on the ground a leathern portmanteau
containing several articles of dress and some books.
I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel.
Fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which I had acquired
at the cottage.
They consisted of Paradise Lost, a volume of Plutarch's Lives and the Sorrows of Werther.
The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight.
I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories whilst my friends
were employed in their ordinary occupations.
I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books.
They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings that sometimes raised me to ecstasy
but more frequently sunk me into the lowest ejection.
In the Sorrows of Werther, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many
opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure
subjects that I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment.
The gentle and domestic manner as it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings
which had for their object something out of self, accorded well with my experience among
my protectors and with the wants which were forever alive in my own bosom.
But I thought Werther himself was a more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined.
His character contained no pretension, but it sank deep.
The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder.
I did not pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions
of the hero whose extinction I wept without precisely understanding it.
As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and condition.
I found myself similar, yet at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning
whom I read and to whose conversation I was a listener.
I sympathized with and partly understood them, but I was unformed in mind.
I was dependent on none and related to none.
The path of my departure was free, and there was none to lament my annihilation.
My person was hideous, and my stature gigantic.
What did this mean?
Who was I?
What was I?
Whence did I come?
What was my destination?
These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to solve them.
The volume of Plutarch's Lives, which I possessed, contained the histories of the first founders
of the ancient republics.
This book had a far different effect on me from the sorrows of Werther.
I learned from Werther's imaginations, despondency, and gloom, but Plutarch taught me high thoughts.
He elevated me above the wretched sphere of my own reflections to admire and love the
heroes of past ages.
Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience.
I had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extensive country, mighty rivers and
boundless seas, but I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large assemblages of men.
The cottage of my protectors had been the only school in which I had studied human nature,
but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action.
I read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species.
I felt the greatest ardor for virtue rise within me, and aberrance for vice, as far
as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, as I applied
them, to pleasure and pain alone.
Induced by these feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, Numa, Salin,
and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and Thesis.
The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my
mind.
Perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier burning for
glory and slaughter, I should have been imbued with different sensations.
But Paradise Lost excited different and far deeper emotions.
I read it, as I'd read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as a true
history.
It moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent god warring with
his creatures was capable of exciting.
I often referred the several situations, as their similarities struck me, to my own.
Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to any other being in existence.
But his state was far different from mine in every other respect.
He had come forth from the hands of a god, a perfect creature, happy and prosperous,
guarded by the especial care of his creator.
He was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature,
but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him,
when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me.
Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings.
Soon after my arrival in the hovel, I discovered some papers in the pocket of the dress which
I had taken from your laboratory.
At first I had neglected them, but now that I was able to decipher the characters in
which they were written, I began to study them with diligence.
It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation.
You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of your work.
This history was mingled with accounts of domestic occurrences.
You doubtless recollect these papers.
Here they are.
Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed origin.
The whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is set in
view.
The minutest description of my odious and loathsome person is given, in language which
painted your own horrors and rendered mine indelible.
I sickened as I read.
Hateful day when I received life, I exclaimed in agony.
A cursed creator, why did you form a monster so hideous that even you turned from me in
disgust?
God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring after his own image, but my form is a filthy
type of yours, more horrid even from the very resemblance.
Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and encourage him, but I am solitary
and abhorred.
These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude.
But when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions,
I persuaded myself that when they should become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues,
they would compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity.
Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
and friendship?
I resolved at least not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with
them which would decide my fate.
I postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance attached to its success
inspired me with a dread lest I should fail.
Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every day's experience that I
was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months could have added to
my sagacity.
Several changes in the meantime took place in the cottage.
The presence of Saffi diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and I also found that a greater
degree of plenty reigned there.
Felix and Agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in their
labors by servants.
They did not appear rich, but they were contented and happy.
Their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous.
Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was.
A cherished hope, it's true, but it vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water
or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade.
I endeavored to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial which in a few months
I resolved to undergo, and sometimes I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble
in the fields of paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathizing
with my feelings and cheering my gloom.
Their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation.
But it was all a dream.
No Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts.
I was alone.
I remembered Adam's supplication to his Creator, but where was mine?
He had abandoned me, and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him.
Autumn passed thus.
I saw with surprise and grief the leaves decay and fall, and nature again assumed the barren
and bleak appearance it had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon.
Yet I did not heed the bleakness of the weather.
I was better fitted by my confirmation for the endurance of cold than heat.
But my chief delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel
of summer.
When those deserted me, I turned with more attention towards the cottagers.
Their happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer.
They loved and sympathized with one another, and their joys, depending on each other, were
not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them.
The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness.
My heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures, to see their sweet
looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition.
I dared not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror.
The poor that stopped at their door were never driven away.
I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest.
I required kindness and sympathy, but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place since I awoke
into life.
My attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into
the cottage of my protectors.
I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally fixed was to enter the dwelling
when the blind old man should be alone.
I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the
object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me.
My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it.
I thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain the goodwill
and mediation of the old De Lacy, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors.
One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground in diffused cheerfulness,
although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha, and Felix departed on a long country walk,
and the old man, at his own desire, was left alone in the cottage.
When his children had departed, he took up his guitar and played several mournful but
sweet airs, more sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before.
At first his countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued, thoughtfulness
and sadness succeeded.
At length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.
My heart beat quick.
This was the hour and moment of trial which would decide my hopes and realize my fears.
The servants were gone to a neighboring fair.
All was silent in and around the cottage.
It was an excellent opportunity, yet when I proceeded to execute my plan, my limbs failed
me and I sank to the ground.
Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks
which I had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat.
The fresh air revived me, and with renewed determination, I approached the door of their cottage.
I knocked.
Who is there?
said the old man.
Come in.
I entered.
Pardon this intrusion, I said.
I am a traveler in want of a little rest.
You would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.
Enter, said Delacy, and I will try in what manner I can to relieve your wants, but unfortunately
my children are from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I should find it difficult to
procure food for you.
Oh, do not trouble yourself, my kind host.
I have food.
It is warmth and rest only that I need.
I sat down, and a silence ensued.
I knew that every minute was precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to
commence the interview.
When the old man addressed me, By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman.
You are French?
No, but I was educated by a French family, and understand that language only.
I am now going to claim the protection of some friends whom I sincerely love, and of
whose favor I have some hopes.
Are they Germans?
No, they are French, but let us change the subject.
I am an unfortunate and deserted creature.
I look around, and I have no relation or friend upon earth.
These amiable people to whom I go have never seen me, and know little of me.
I am full of fears, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world forever.
Oh, do not despair.
To be friendless is indeed unfortunate, but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any
obvious self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity.
Rely therefore on your hopes, and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.
They are kind.
They are the most excellent creatures in the world, but unfortunately they are prejudiced
against me.
I have good dispositions.
My life has been hitherto harmless, and in some degree beneficial, but if fatal prejudice
clouds their eyes, and when they ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold
only a detestable monster.
That is indeed unfortunate, but if you are really blameless, cannot you undeceive them?
I am about to undertake that task, and it is on that account that I feel so many overwhelming
terrors.
I tenderly love these friends.
I have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily kindness toward them,
but they believe that I wish to injure them, and that is the prejudice which I wish to
overcome.
Where do these friends reside?
Near this spot.
The old man paused, and then continued,
If you will unreservedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be
of use in undeceiving them.
I am blind, and cannot judge of your countenance, but there is something in your words which
persuades me that you are sincere.
I am poor and in exile, but it will afford me true pleasure to be in any way serviceable
to a human creature.
Excellent man, I thank you and accept your generous offer.
You raise me from the dust by this kindness, and I trust that by your aid I shall not be
driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow creatures.
Heaven forbid, even if you were really criminal, for that can only drive you to desperation
and not instigate you to virtue.
I also am unfortunate.
I and my family have been condemned, although innocent.
Judge therefore if I do not feel for your misfortunes.
How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?
From your lips first have I heard the voice of kindness directed toward me.
I shall be forever grateful, and your present humanity assures me of success with those
friends whom I am on the point of meeting.
May I know their names and residence of those friends?
I paused.
This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to rob me of or bestow happiness
on me forever.
I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all
my remaining strength.
I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud.
At that moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors.
I had not a moment to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, Now is the time.
Save and protect me.
You and your family are the friends whom I seek.
Do not you desert me in the hour of trial?
Great, God!
exclaimed the old man.
Who are you?
At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered.
Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me?
Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage.
Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees
I clung.
In a transport of fury he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently with a stick.
I could have torn him limb from limb as the lion rinsed the antelope, but my heart sank
within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained.
I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted
the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.
XVI CURSED, CURSED CREATOR! Why did I live? Why in that instant did I not extinguish the
spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not. Despair had not yet
taken possession of me. My feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure
have destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants, and have glutted myself with their shrieks
and misery. When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood, and now no longer
of discovery. I gave vent to my anguish and fearful howlings. I was like a wild beast
that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through
the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh, what a miserable night I passed! The cold stars
shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me. Now and then the
sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All save I were at rest
or in enjoyment. I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathized
with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then
to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin. But this was a luxury of sensation that could
not endure. I became fatigued with excessive bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass
in the sick impotence of despair. There was none among the myriads of men that existed
who would pity or assist me. And should I feel kindness towards my enemies? No, from
that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and more than all against him
who had formed me and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. The sun rose. I heard
the voices of men and knew that it was impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly
I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection
on my situation. The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some degree
of tranquility, and when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not help
believing that I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently.
It was apparent that my conversation had interested the father on my behalf, and I was a fool
in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I ought to have familiarized
the old DeLacy to me, and by degrees to have discovered myself to the rest of his family,
when they should have been prepared for my approach. But I did not believe my errors
to be irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to the cottage, seek
the old man, and by my representations win him to my party. These thoughts calmed me,
and in the afternoon I sank into a profound sleep. But the fever of my blood did not allow
me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was forever acting
before my eyes. The females were flying and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father's
feet. I awoke exhausted, and finding that it was already night, I crept forth from my
hiding place and went in search of food. When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps
towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I
crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the accustomed hour when the
family arose. That hour passed. The sun mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did
not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the
cottage was dark, and I heard no motion. I cannot describe the agony of this suspense.
Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage they entered into conversation
using violent gesticulations. But I did not understand what they said as they spoke the
language of the country, which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after, however,
Felix approached with another man. I was surprised as I knew that he had not quitted the cottage
that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from his discourse the meaning of these unusual
appearances.
"'Do you consider,' said his companion to him, "'that you will be obliged to pay three
months' rent and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not wish to take any unfair advantage,
and I beg, therefore, that you will take some days to consider of your determination.'
"'It is utterly useless,' replied Felix. We can never again inhabit your cottage. The
life of my father is in the greatest danger, going to the dreadful circumstances that I
have related. My wife and my sister will never recover from their horror. I entreat
you not to reason with me any more. Take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this
place.' Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion entered the cottage
in which they remained for a few minutes, and then departed. I never saw any of the family
of De Lacy more.
I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of utter and stupid despair.
My protectors had departed and had broken the only link that held me to the world. For
the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive
to control them. But allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my mind towards
injury and death. When I thought of my friends, of the mild voice of De Lacy, the gentle eyes
of Agatha, and the exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished, and a gush
of tears somewhat soothed me. But again, when I reflected that they had spurned and deserted
me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to injure anything human, I turned
my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced I placed a variety of combustibles
around the cottage, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations.
As the night advanced a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the cloud
that had loitered in the heavens. The blast tore along like a mighty avalanche and produced
a kind of insanity in my spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted
the dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage. My eyes still
fixed on the western horizon, my brand. It sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw
and heath and bushes which I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the cottage
was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with their forked
and destroying tongues. As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of
the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods. And now, with the
world before me, whither should I bend my steps? I resolved to fly far from the scene
of my misfortunes. But to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At
least my mind. I learned from your papers that you were my father, my creator, and to
whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life. Among the lessons
that Felix had bestowed upon Safi, geography had not been omitted. I had learned from these
the relative situations of the different countries of the earth. You had mentioned Geneva as
the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to proceed. But how
was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach
my destination, but the sun was my only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that
I was to pass through, nor could I ask information from a single human being. But I did not despair.
From you only could I hope for Sukkur, although towards you I felt no sentiment, but that
of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. But on you only
had I any claim for pity and redress. And from you I determined to seek that justice
which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being that wore the human form. My travels
were long, and the sufferings I endured intense. It was late in autumn when I quitted the district
where I had so long resided. I traveled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage
of a human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless. Rain and snow
poured around me, mighty rivers were frozen, the surface of the earth was hard and chill
and bare, and I found no shelter. Oh earth, how often did I implicate curses on the cause
of my being! The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall
and bitterness. The nearer I approached your habitation, the more deeply did I feel the
spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow fell, and the waters were hardened, but I
rested not. A few incidents now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country.
But I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite,
no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food. But a circumstance
that happened when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered
its warmth and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in a special manner the bitterness
and horror of my feelings. I generally rested during the day and traveled only when I was
secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, finding that my path lay
through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey after the sun had risen. The day,
which was one of the first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine
and the bombiness of the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure that had long appeared
dead revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself
to be borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy.
Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness
towards the blessed sun which bestowed such joy upon me. I continued to wind among the
paths of the wood until I came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river
into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I
paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard the sound of voices that induced
me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl
came running towards the spot where I was concealed laughing, as if she ran from someone
in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river when suddenly
her foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my hiding place and
with extreme labor, from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore.
She was senseless, and I endeavored by every means in my power to restore animation the
deeper parts of the woods. I followed speedily, I hardly knew why, but when the man saw me
drew near, he aimed a gun, which he carried at my body and fired. I sank to the ground,
and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood. This was then the reward
of my benevolence. I had saved a human being from destruction, the feelings of kindness
and gentleness which I had entertained, but a few moments before gave place to hellish
rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all
mankind. But the agony of my wound overcame me. My pulses paused, and I fainted. I was
for some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavoring to cure the wound which
I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there
or passed through. At any rate, I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented
also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their infliction. My daily
revenge, such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had endured.
After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The labors I endured were no longer
to be alleviated by the bright sun or gentle breezes of spring. All joy was but a mockery
which insulted my desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made
for the enjoyment of pleasure. But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from
this time I reached the environs of Geneva. It was evening when I arrived, and I retired
to a hiding place among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I should apply
to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes
of evening or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura. At
this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection which was disturbed
by the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen
with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that
this little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have imbibed
a horror of deformity. If therefore I could seize him and educate him as my companion
and friend, I should not be so desolate in this peopled earth. Urged by this impulse
I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him towards me. As soon as he beheld my form
he placed his hands before his eyes and uttered a shriek. I drew his hand forcibly from his
face and said, Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to hurt you. Listen
to me. He struggled violently. Let me go, he cried. Monster! Ugly wretch! You wish to
eat me and tear me to pieces. You are an ogre. Let me go or I will tell my papa. Boy, you
will never see your father again. You must come with me. Hideous monster! Let me go.
My papa is a syndic. He is Monsieur Frankenstein. He will punish you. You dare not keep me.
Frankenstein! You belong then to my enemy. To him towards whom I have sworn eternal revenge
you shall be my first victim. The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which
carried despair to my heart. I grasped his throat to silence him and in a moment he lay
dead at my feet. I gazed on my victim and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
triumph. Clapping my hands, I exclaimed, I too can create desolation. My enemy is not
invulnerable. This death will carry despair to him and a thousand other miseries shall
torment and destroy him.
As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his breast. I took it. It was
a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted
me. For a few moments I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by dark lashes and
her lovely lips. But presently my rage returned. I remembered that I was forever deprived of
the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow and that she whose resemblance
I contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
expressive of disgust and of fright.
Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I only wonder that at that moment,
instead of venting my sensations and exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and
perish in the attempt to destroy them. While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the
spot where I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I entered
a barn which had appeared to me to be empty. A woman was sleeping on some straw. She was
young, not indeed so beautiful as her whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect
and blooming in the loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those whose
joy-emparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. And then I bent over her and whispered,
Awake, fairest, thy lover is near. He would give his life but to obtain one look of affection
from thine eyes. My beloved, awake!
The sleeper stirred. A thrill of terror ran through me. Should she indeed awake and see
me and curse me and denounce the murderer? Thus would she assuredly act if her darkened
eyes opened and she beheld me. The thought was madness. It stirred from the fiend within
me. Not I, but she shall suffer. The murder I have committed because I am forever robbed
of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her. Be hers
the punishment.
Thanks to the lessons of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now to work mischief.
I bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress. She moved
again and I fled.
For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing
to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and its miseries forever. At length
I wandered towards these mountains and have ranged through their immense recesses consumed
by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to
comply with my requisition. I am alone and miserable. Man will not associate with me,
but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My companion
must be of the same species and have the same defects. This being you must create.
The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the expectation of a reply.
But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his proposition.
You must create a female for me, with whom I can live in the interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being.
This you alone can do, and I demanded of you as a right which you must not refuse to concede.
The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers.
And as he said this, I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me.
I do refuse it, I replied, and no torture shall ever extort a consent from me.
You may render me the most miserable of men, but you shall never make me base in my own eyes.
Shall I create another like yourself whose joint wickedness might desolate the world? Be gone.
I have answered you. You may torture me, but I will never consent.
You are in the wrong, replied the fiend.
And instead of threatening, I am content to reason with you.
I am malicious because I am miserable. Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind?
You, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph.
Remember that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he pities me.
You would not call it murder if you could precipitate me into one of those ice rifts and destroy my frame, the work of your own hands.
Shall I respect man when he condemns me?
Let him live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
But that cannot be. The human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union.
Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery.
I will revenge my injuries. If I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly towards you, my archenemy.
Because, my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred.
Have a care. I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of your birth.
A fiendish rage animated him as he said this. His face was wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold.
Presently he calmed himself and proceeded.
I intend to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for you do not reflect that you are the cause of its success.
If any being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold.
But for that one creature's sake, I would make peace with the whole kind.
But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realized.
What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate.
I demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself.
The gratification is small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me.
It is true. We shall be monsters, cut off from all the world.
But on that account, we shall be more attached to one another.
Our lives will not be happy, but they will be harmless, and free from the misery I now feel.
Oh, my creator, make me happy. Let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit.
Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing.
Do not deny me my requests.
I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences of my consent.
But I felt that there was some justice in his argument.
His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature of fine sensations.
And did I not, as his maker, owe him all the portion of happiness that it was in my power to bestow?
He saw my change of feelings and continued.
If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see us again.
I will go to the vast wilds of South America.
My food is not that of man. I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite.
Acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment.
My companion will be of the same nature as myself, and will be content with the same fare.
We shall make a bed of dried leaves.
The sun will shine on us as on man, and will ripen our food.
The picture I present to you is peaceful and human,
and you must feel that you could deny it only in the wantonness of power and cruelty.
Pityless as you have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes.
Let me seize the favorable moment and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire.
You propose, replied I, to fly from the habitations of man,
to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only companions.
How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile?
You will return and again seek their kindness, and you will meet with their detestation.
Your evil passions will be renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
This may not be. Cease to argue the point, for I cannot consent.
How inconstant are your feelings!
But a moment ago you were moved by my representations.
And why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit and by you that made me,
that with the companion you bestow I will quit the neighborhood of man and dwell,
as it may chance, in the most savage of places.
My evil passions will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy.
My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my Maker.
His words had a strange effect upon me.
I compassionated him, and sometimes felt a wish to console him.
But when I looked upon him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked,
my heart sickened, and my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred,
I tried to stifle these sensations.
I thought that as I could not sympathize with him,
I had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness
which was yet in my power to bestow.
You swear, I said, to be harmless,
but have you not already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust you?
May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph
by affording a wider scope for your revenge?
How is this I must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer.
If I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion.
The love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes,
and I shall become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant.
My vices are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor,
and my virtues will necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal.
I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being
and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which I am now excluded.
I paused some time to reflect on all he had related
and the various arguments which he had employed.
I thought of the promise of virtues which he had displayed on the opening of his existence
and the subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn
which his protectors had manifested towards him.
His power and threats were not omitted in my calculations.
A creature who could exist in the ice caves of the glaciers
and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with.
After a long pause of reflection,
I concluded that the justice due both to him and my fellow creatures
demanded of me that I should comply with his request.
Turning to him, therefore, I said,
I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe forever,
and every other place in the neighborhood of man,
as soon as I shall deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile.
I swear, he cried, by the sun and by the blue sky of heaven
and by the fire of love that burns my heart,
that if you grant my prayer, while they exist, you shall never behold me again.
Depart to your home and commence your labors.
I shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety,
and fear not, but that when you are ready, I shall appear.
Seeing this, he suddenly quitted me,
fearful perhaps of any change in my sentiments.
I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of an eagle,
and quickly lost among the undulations of the sea of ice.
His tail had occupied the whole day,
and the sun was on the verge of the horizon when he departed.
I knew that I ought to hasten my descent towards the valley,
as I should soon be encompassed in darkness.
But my heart was heavy and my steps slow.
The labor of winding among the little paths of the mountain,
and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced, perplexed me,
occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences of the day had produced.
Night was far advanced when I came to the halfway resting place,
and seated myself beside the fountain.
The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them.
The dark pines rose before me,
and every here and there a broken tree lay on the ground.
It was a scene of wonderful solemnity,
and stirred strange thoughts within me.
I wept bitterly,
and clasping my hands in agony I exclaimed,
Oh, stars and clouds and winds,
you're all about to mock me.
If you really pity me,
crush sensation and memory that may become as nought.
But if nought, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.
These were wild and miserable thoughts,
but I cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me,
and how I listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull, ugly siroc on its way to consume me.
Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamouni.
I took no rest, but returned immediately to Geneva.
Even in my own heart I could give no expression to my sensations.
They weighed on me with a mountain's weight,
and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
Thus I returned home, and entering the house presented myself to the family.
My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm,
but I answered no question.
Scarcely did I speak.
I felt as if I were placed under a ban,
as if I had no right to claim their sympathies,
as if never more might I enjoy companionship with them.
Yet even thus I loved them to adoration,
and, to save them, I resolved to dedicate myself to my most abhorred task.
The prospect of such an occupation made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream,
and that thought only had to be the reality of life.
Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva,
and I could not collect the courage to recommence my work.
I feared the vengeance of the disappointed fiend,
yet I was unable to overcome my repugnance to the task which was enjoined me.
I found that I could not compose a female,
without again devoting several months to profound study and laborious disquisition.
I had heard of some discoveries having been made by an English philosopher,
the knowledge of which was material to my success,
and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father's consent to visit England for this purpose,
but I clung to every pretense of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking
whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me.
A change indeed had taken place in me.
My health, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored,
and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably.
My father saw this change with pleasure,
and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
which every now and then would return by fits,
and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine.
At these moments I took refuge in the most perfect solitude.
I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little boat,
watching the clouds and listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless.
But the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure,
and on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more cheerful heart.
It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me.
I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself.
And yet you are still unhappy and still avoid our society.
For some time I was lost in conjecture as to the cause of this,
but yesterday an idea struck me, and if it is well founded I conjure you to avow it.
Reserve on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.
I trembled violently at his exhortium, and my father continued,
I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth
as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years.
You were attached to each other from your earliest infancy, you studied together,
and appeared in dispositions and tastes entirely suited to one another.
But so blind is the experience of man that what I conceive to be the best assistance to my plan may have entirely destroyed it.
You, perhaps, regarded her as your sister, without any wish that she might become your wife.
Nay, you may have met with another whom you may love, and considering yourself as bound in honor to Elizabeth,
this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear to feel.
My dear father, reassure yourself, I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely.
I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection.
My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.
The expression of your sentiments on this subject, my dear Victor, gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced.
If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy.
However, present events may cast a gloom over us.
But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate.
Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnization of the marriage.
We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us from that everyday tranquility befitting my years and infirmities.
You are younger, yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune,
that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honor and utility that you may have formed.
Do not suppose, however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you,
or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness.
Interpret my words with candor, and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.
I listen to my father in silence, and remain for some time incapable of offering any reply.
I revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of thoughts, and endeavored to arrive at some conclusion.
Alas, to me the idea of an immediate union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and dismay.
I was bound by a solemn promise which I had not yet fulfilled, and dared not break.
Or if I did, what manifold miseries might not impend over me and my devoted family?
Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the ground?
I must perform my engagement, and let the monster depart with his mate,
before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from which I expected peace.
I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England,
or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country
whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in my present undertaking.
The latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory.
Besides, I had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father's house,
while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved.
I knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur,
the slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with horror.
I was aware also that I should often lose all self-command,
all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my unearthly occupation.
I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed.
Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be restored to my family in peace and happiness.
My promise fulfilled, the monster would depart forever.
Or, so my fond fancy imaged, some accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him,
and put an end to my slavery forever.
These feelings dictated my answer to my father.
I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request,
I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion,
while I urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to comply.
After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects,
he was glad to find that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey,
and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my return, have restored me entirely to myself.
The duration of my absence was left to my own choice.
A few months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated.
One paternal kind precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion.
Without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth,
arranged that Clare Valle should join me at Strasbourg.
This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task.
Yet at the commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be an impediment,
and truly I rejoiced that thus I should be saved many hours of lonely, maddening reflection.
Nay, Henry might stand between me and the intrusion of my foe.
If I were alone, would he not at times force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task,
or to contemplate its progress?
To England, therefore, I was bound,
and it was understood that my union with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return.
My father's age rendered him extremely averse to delay.
For myself there was one reward I promised myself from my detested toils,
one consolation for my unparalleled sufferings.
It was the prospect of that day when, enfranchised from my miserable slavery,
I might claim Elizabeth and forget the past in my union with her.
I now made arrangements for my journey,
but one feeling haunted me which filled me with fear and agitation.
During my absence I should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy
and unprotected from his attacks, exacerbated as he might be by my departure.
But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would he not accompany me to England?
This imagination was dreadful in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
I was agonized with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of this might happen.
But through the whole period during which I was the slave of my creature,
I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the moment,
and my present sensation strongly intimated that the fiend would follow me
and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations.
It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my native country.
My journey had been my own suggestion, and Elizabeth therefore acquiesced.
But she was filled with disquiet at the idea of my suffering away from her,
the inroads of misery and grief.
It had been her care which provided me a companion in Clareval,
and yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances
which call forth a woman's sedulous attention.
She longed to bid me haste in my return.
A thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell.
I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away,
hardly knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around.
I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on it,
to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me.
Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes,
but my eyes were fixed and unobserving.
I could only think of the bourne of my travels,
and the work which was to occupy me whilst they endured.
After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed many leagues,
I arrived at Strasbourg, where I waited two days for Clareval.
He came.
Lass, how great was the contrast between us!
He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the setting sun,
and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new day.
He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky.
This is what it is to live, he cried. How I enjoy existence!
But you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful?
In truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts,
and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine.
And you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clareval,
who observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and delight,
than in listening to my reflections.
Ay, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.
We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasbourg to Rotterdam,
whence we might take shipping for London.
During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasbourg,
arrived at Mains.
The course of the Rhine below Mains becomes much more picturesque.
The river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high but steep, and of beautiful forms.
We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices,
surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible.
This part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape.
In one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices,
with a dark Rhine rushing beneath.
And on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards,
with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene.
We travelled at the time of the vintage,
and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream.
Even I, depressed in mind and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings,
even I was pleased.
I lay at the bottom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky,
I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a stranger.
And if these were my sensations, who could describe those of Henry?
He felt as if he had been transported to Fairyland,
and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man.
I have seen, he said, the most beautiful scenes of my own country.
I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri,
where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water,
casting black and impenetrable shades,
which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance were it not for the most verdant islands
that believe the eye by their gay appearance.
I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest,
when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea
of what the waterspout must be on the great ocean,
and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain,
where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche,
and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind.
I have seen the mountains of La Vallée and the Pays-du-Vaux,
but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders.
The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange,
but there is a charm in the banks of this divine river that I never before saw equalled.
Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice,
and that also on the island, almost concealed among the foliage of those beautiful trees,
and now that group of laborers coming from among their vines,
and that village half-hid in the recess of the mountain.
Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man
than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of our own country.
Clairvaux, beloved friend, even now it delights me to record your words
and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving.
He was a being formed in the very poetry of nature.
His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart.
His soul overflowed with ardent affections,
and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature
that the world-minded teach us to look for only in the imagination.
But even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind.
The scenery of external nature, which others regard only with admiration, he loved with ardor.
The sounding cataract haunted him like a passion.
The tall rock, the mountain, and the deep gloomy wood,
their colors and their forms were then to him an appetite,
a feeling, and a love that had no need of a remoter charm by thought supplied
or any interest unborrowed from the eye.
And where does he now exist?
Is this gentle and lovely being lost forever?
Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations, fanciful and magnificent,
which formed a world whose existence depended on the life of its creator,
has this mind perished?
Does it now only exist in my memory?
No, it is not thus.
Your form, so divinely wrought and beaming with beauty, has decayed.
But your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend.
Pardon this gush of sorrow.
These ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry.
But they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates.
I will proceed with my tale.
Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland,
and we resolved to post the remainder of our way,
for the wind was contrary and the stream of the river was too gentle to aid us.
Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery,
but we arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England.
It was on a clear morning in the latter days of December
that I first saw the white cliffs of Britain.
The banks of the Thames presented a new scene.
They were flat, but fertile,
and almost every town was marked by the remembrance of some story.
We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada,
Gravesend, Woolwich and Greenwich,
places which I had heard of even in my country.
At length we saw the numerous steeples of London,
St. Paul's towering above them all,
and the Tower famed in English history.
This reading by Megan Jane Daniels Suiyasu.
Frankenstein by Mary Shelley.
London was our present point of rest.
We determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city.
Clairvaux desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this time.
But this was with me a secondary object.
I was principally occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary
for the completion of my promise,
and quickly availed myself of the letters of introduction that I had brought with me,
addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers.
If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure.
But a blight had come over my existence,
and I only visited these people for the sake of the information they might give me
on the subject in which my interest was so terribly profound.
Company was irksome to me,
when alone I could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth.
The voice of Henry soothed me,
and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory peace.
But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to my heart.
I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow men.
This barrier was sealed with the blood of William and Justine,
and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish.
But in Clairvaux I saw the image of my former self.
He was inquisitive and anxious to gain experience and instruction.
The difference of manners which he observed
was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement.
He was also pursuing at an object he had long had in view.
His design was to visit India,
in the belief that he had in his knowledge of its various languages,
and in the views he had taken of its society,
the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonisation and trade.
In Britain only could he further the execution of his plan.
He was forever busy,
and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind.
I tried to conceal this as much as possible,
that I might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one
who is entering on a new scene of life,
undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection.
I often refused to accompany him,
alleging another engagement,
that I might remain alone.
I now also began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation,
and this was to me like the torture of single drops of water
continually falling on the head.
Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish,
and every word that I spoke in allusion to it
caused my lips to quiver and my heart to palpitate.
After passing some months in London,
we received a letter from a person in Scotland
who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva.
He mentioned the beauties of his native country
and asked us if those were not sufficient allurements
to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as Perth,
where he resided.
Clearville eagerly desired to accept this invitation,
and I, although I abhorred society,
wished to again view mountains and streams
and all the wondrous works
with which nature adorns her chosen dwelling places.
We had arrived in England at the beginning of October
and it was now February.
We accordingly determined to commence our journey
towards the north at the expiration of another month.
In this expedition,
we did not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh,
but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock and the Cumberland Lakes,
resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour
about the end of July.
I packed up my chemical instruments
and the materials I had collected,
resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook
in the northern highlands of Scotland.
We quitted London on the 27th of March
and remained a few days at Windsor,
rambling in its beautiful forest.
This was a new scene to us mountaineers.
The majestic oaks, the quantity of game
and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us.
From thence, we proceeded to Oxford.
As we entered this city,
our minds were filled with the remembrance of the events
that had been transacted there
more than a century and a half before.
It was here that Charles I had collected his forces.
This city had remained faithful to him
after the whole nation had forsaken his cause
to join the standard of parliament and liberty.
The memory of that unfortunate king and his companions,
the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring,
his queen and son,
gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city
which they might have supposed to have inhabited.
The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here
and we delighted to trace its footsteps.
If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification,
the appearance of the city had yet in itself
sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
The colleges are ancient and picturesque,
the streets are almost magnificent
and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it
through meadows of exquisite verdure,
is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters
which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers
and spires and domes embossed among aged trees.
I enjoyed this scene
and yet my enjoyment was embittered
both by the memory of the past
and the anticipation of the future.
I was formed for peaceful happiness.
During my youthful days,
disconsent never visited my mind
and if ever I was overcome by an anui,
the sight of what is beautiful in nature
or the study of what is excellent and sublime
in the productions of man
could always interest my heart
and communicate elasticity to my spirits.
But I am a blasted tree.
The bolt has entered my soul
and I felt then that I should survive
to exhibit what I shall soon cease to be.
A miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.
We passed a considerable period at Oxford,
rambling amongst its environs
and endeavouring to identify every spot
which might relate to the most animating epoch
of the English history.
Our little voyages of discovery
were often prolonged by the successive objects
that presented themselves.
We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hamden
and the field on which that patriot fell.
For a moment, my soul was elevated
from its debasing and miserable fears
to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty
and self-sacrifice of which these sights
were the monuments and the remembrances.
For an instant, I dared to shake off my chains
and look around me with a free and lofty spirit,
but the iron had eaten into my flesh
and I sank again,
trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.
We left Oxford with regret and proceeded to Matlock,
which was our next place of rest.
The country in the neighbourhood of this village
resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland,
but everything is on a lower scale
and the green hills want the crown of distant white alps,
which always attend on the piney mountains
of my native country.
We visited the wondrous cave
and the little cabinets of natural history
where the curiosities are disposed in the same manner
as in the collections at Servox and Chamonix.
The latter name made me tremble when pronounced by Henry
and I hastened to quit Matlock,
with which that terrible scene was thus associated.
From Derby, still journeying northwards,
we passed two months in Cumberland and Westmoreland.
I can now almost fancy myself amongst the Swiss mountains.
The little patches of snow,
which yet lingered on the northern sides of the mountains,
the lakes and the dashing of the rocking streams
were all familiar and dear sights to me.
Here also we made some acquaintances
who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness.
The delight of Clevel was proportionately greater than mine.
His mind expanded in the company of men of talent
and he found in his own nature greater capacities and resources
than he could have ever imagined himself to have possessed
while he associated with his inferiors.
I could pass my life here, he said to me,
and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.
But he found that a traveller's life
is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments.
His feelings are forever on the stretch
and when he begins to sink in to repose
he finds himself obliged to quit
that on which he rests in pleasure for something new
which again engages his attention
and which he also forsakes for other novelties.
We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmoreland
and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants
when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached
and we left them to travel on.
For my own part, I was not sorry.
I had now neglected my promise for some time
and I feared the effects of the demon's disappointment.
He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives.
This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment
from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace.
I waited for my letters with feverish impatience.
If they were delayed, I was miserable and overcome by a thousand fears
and when they arrived and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth and my father
I hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate.
Sometimes I thought that the fiend followed me
and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
When these thoughts possessed me
I would not quit Henry for a moment
but followed him as his shadow
to protect him from the fancied range of his destroyer.
I felt as if I had committed some great crime
the consciousness of which haunted me.
I was guiltless but I had indeed drawn down some horrible curse upon my head
as mortal as that of crime.
I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind
and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being.
Clairvaux did not like it so well as Oxford
for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh
its romantic castle and its environs
the most delightful in the world Arthur's Seat, Sir Barnard's Whirl
and the Pentland Hills compensated him for the change
and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration.
But I was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
We left Edinburgh in a week
passing through Coupar, St Andrews and along the banks of the Tay to Perth
where our friend greeted us.
But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers
or enter into their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest
and accordingly I told Clairvaux that I wished to make the tour of Scotland alone.
Do you, said I, enjoy yourself and let this be our rendezvous.
I may be absent a month or two
but do not interfere with my emotions, I entreat you.
Leave me to peace and solitude for a short time
and when I return I hope it will be with a lighter heart
more congenial to your own temper.
Henry wished to dissuade me
but seeing me bend on this plan ceased to remonstrate.
He entreated me to write often.
I had rather be with you, he said,
in your solitary rambles than with these Scotch people whom I do not know.
Hasten then, dear friend, to return
that I may again feel myself somewhat at home
which I cannot do in your absence.
Having parted from my friend
I determined to visit some remote spot of Scotland
and finish my work in solitude.
I did not doubt but that the monster followed me
and would discover himself to me when I should have finished
that he might receive his companion.
With this resolution I traversed the Northern Highlands
and fixed on one of the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours.
It was a place fitted for such a work
being hardly more than a rock whose sides were continually beaten upon by the waves.
The soil was barren
scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows
and oatmeal for its inhabitants
which consisted of five persons whose gaunt and scraggly limbs
gave tokens of their miserable fare.
Vegetables and bread when they indulged in such luxuries
and even fresh water was to be procured from the mainland
which was about five miles distant.
On the whole island there were but three miserable huts
and one of these was vacant when I arrived.
This I hired.
It contained but two rooms and these exhibited all the squalidness
of the most miserable pernery.
The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered
and the door was off its hinges.
I ordered it to be repaired, bought for some furniture
and took possession.
An incident which would doubtless have occasioned some surprise
had not all the senses of the cottagers been benumbed by want
and squalid poverty.
As it was I lived ungazed and unmolested
hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave
so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men.
In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour
but in the evening when the weather permitted
I walked on the stony beach of the sea to listen to the waves
as they roared and dashed at my feet.
It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene.
I thought of Switzerland.
It was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape.
Its hills are covered with vines
and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains.
Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky
and when travelled by the winds
their tumult is but the play of a lively infant
when compared to the roaring of the giant ocean.
In this manner
I distributed my occupations when I first arrived
but as I proceeded in my labour
it became every day more horrible and irksome to me.
Sometimes I could not prevail on myself
to enter my laboratory for several days
and at other times I toiled day and night
in order to complete my work.
It was indeed a filthy process in which I was engaged.
During my first experiment
a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me
to the horror of my employment.
My mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour
and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings.
But now I went to it in cold blood
and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.
Thus situated
employed in the most detestable occupation
immersed in a solitude
where nothing could for an instant call my attention
from the actual scene in which I was engaged
my spirits became unequal.
I grew restless and nervous.
Every moment I feared to meet my persecutor.
Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground
fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object
which I so much dreaded to behold.
I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow creatures
lest when alone
he should come to claim his companion.
In the meantime I worked on
and my labour was already considerably advanced.
I looked towards its completion
with a tremulous and eager hope
which I dared not trust myself to question
but which was intermixed with obscure
forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
in my bosom.
I sat one evening in my laboratory.
The sun had set and the moon was just rising from the sea.
I had not sufficient light for my employment and I remained idle in a pause of consideration
of whether I should leave my labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting
attention to it.
As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of
what I was now doing.
Three years before I was engaged in the same manner and had created a fiend whose unparalleled
barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it forever with the bitterest remorse.
I was now about to form another being of whose dispositions I was alike ignorant.
She might become ten thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight for its own sake
in murder and wretchedness.
He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she had
And she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might refuse
to comply with a compact made before her creation.
They might even hate each other, the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity,
and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence for it when it came before his eyes in the
female form?
She might also turn with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man.
She might quit him, and he, being again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
deserted by one of his own species.
Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the New World, yet one of the
results of those sympathies for which the demon thirsted would be children, and a race
of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the species
of man a condition precarious and full of terror.
Had I right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations?
I had been moved by the sophisms of the being I had created.
I had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats, but now, for the first time, the
wickedness of my promise burst upon me.
I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness
had not hesitated to buy its own piece at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the
whole human race.
I trembled, and my heart felled within me when, on looking up, I saw by the light of
the moon the demon at the casement.
A ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which
he had allotted to me.
Yes, he had followed me in my travels, he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves,
or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths, and now he came to mark my progress and claim
the fulfilment of my promise.
As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery.
I thought with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him,
and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged.
The wretch saw me destroy the creature, on whose future existence he depended for happiness,
and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.
I left the room and, locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own heart never to resume
my labours, and then, with trembling steps, I sought my own apartment.
I was alone, none were near me to dissipate the gloom and relieve me from the sickening
oppression of the most terrible reveries.
Several hours passed, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea.
It was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature opposed under the eye
of the quiet moon.
A few fishing vessels alone specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted
the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another.
I felt the silence, although I was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until
my ear was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a person landed
close to my house.
In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if someone endeavoured to open
it softly.
I trembled from head to foot, I felt a presentiment of who it was, and wished to where I was one
of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine, but I was overcome by the sensation
of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavoured to fly
from an impending danger and was routed to the spot.
Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage, the door opened, and the
wretch, whom I dreaded, appeared.
Shutting the door, he approached me and said in a smothered voice,
You have destroyed the work which you began.
Was it that you intend?
Do you dare to break your promise?
I have endured toil and misery.
I left Switzerland with you.
I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among its willow islands, and over the summits of
its hills.
I have dwelt many months in the heaths of England, and among the deserts of Scotland.
I have endured incalculable fatigue and cold, and hunger.
Do you dare destroy my hopes?
Be gone!
I do break my promise.
Never will I create another like yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.
Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself unworthy of my condescension.
Remember that I have power.
You believe yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of day
will be hateful to you.
You are my creator, but I am your master.
Obey!
The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is arrived.
Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness, but they confirm in me a determination
of not creating you a companion in vice.
Shall I, in cold blood, set loose upon the earth a demon whose delight is in death and
wretchedness?
Be gone!
I am firm, and your words only exasperate my rage.
The monster saw my determination in my face, and gnashed his teeth in the impotence of
anger.
Shall each man, cried he, find a wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and
I be alone?
I had feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
Man, you may hate, but beware!
Your hours will pass in dread and misery, and soon the bolt will fall which must ravage
you from your happiness forever.
Are you to be happy?
Will I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness?
You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains, revenge henceforth dearer than light
or food.
I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your misery.
Beware, for I am fearless, and therefore powerful.
I will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom.
Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict.
Devil, cease, and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend beneath words.
Leave me, I am inexorable.
It is well, I go, but remember, I shall be with you on your wedding night.
I started forward and exclaimed,
Villain, before you sign my death warrant, be sure that you yourself safe.
I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with precipitation.
In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot across the waters with an arrow-y swiftness,
and was soon lost amidst the waves.
All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears.
I burned with rage to pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean.
I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed,
while my imagination conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me.
Why had I not followed him and closed with him in mortal strife?
But I had suffered him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the mainland.
I shuddered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiable revenge.
And then I thought again of his words,
I will be with you on your wedding night.
That, then, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my destiny.
In that hour I should die and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice.
The prospect did not move me to fear, yet when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth,
of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbariously snatched from her,
tears, the first I had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes,
and I resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle.
The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean.
My feelings became calmer, if it may be called calmness,
when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of despair.
I left the house, the horrid scene of last night's contention,
and walked on the beach of the sea, which I almost regarded as an
insurmountable barrier between me and my fellow creatures.
Nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me.
I desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock.
Wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery.
If I returned, it was to be sacrificed, or to see those whom I loved most
die under the grasp of a demon whom I had myself created.
I walked about the isle like a restless spectre,
separated from all it loved and miserable in the separation.
When it became noon and the sun rose higher,
I lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep sleep.
I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves were agitated,
and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery.
The sleep into which I now sank refreshed me, and when I awoke,
I again felt as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself,
and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure.
Yet still, the words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death knell.
They appeared like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.
The sun had far descended, and I sat still on the shore,
satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake.
When I saw a fishing boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet,
it contained letters from Geneva and one from Clearville entreating me to join him.
He said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was,
that the letters from the friends he had formed in London desired his return
to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his Indian enterprise.
I could no longer delay his departure, but as his journey to London might be followed,
even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage,
he entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could spare.
He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth,
that we might proceed southwards together.
This letter in a degree recalled me to life,
and I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.
Yet before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered to reflect.
I must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose, I must enter the room which had been
the scene of my odious work, and I must handle those utensils, the sight of which was sickening
me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of my
laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had destroyed, laid scattered
on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had mingled with the living flesh of a human being.
I paused to collect myself, and then entered the chamber.
With trembling hand, I conveyed the instruments out of the room, but I reflected that I ought
not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants,
and I accordingly put them into a basket with a great quantity of stones, and laying them up,
determined to throw them into the sea that very night. And in the meantime, I sat upon the beach,
employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.
Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place in my feelings since the night
of the appearance of the demon. I had before regarded my promise with gloomy despair as a
thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled. But now I felt as if a film had been
from before my eyes, and that I saw for the first time clearly. The idea of renewing my labors
did not for one instant occur to me, the threat I had weighed upon my thoughts, but I did not reflect
that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had resolved in my own mind that to create another
like the fiend I had first made would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness
and I banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different conclusion.
Between two and three in the morning the moon rose, and I then, putting my basket aboard a little
skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary, a few boats were
returning towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the commission of
dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my fellow creatures.
At one time the moon, which had been before clear, was suddenly overspread by a thick cloud,
and I took advantage of the moment of darkness and cast my basket into the sea. I listened to
the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. The sky became clouded,
but the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising.
But it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable sensations that I resolved to prolong
my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom
of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat as
keel cut through the waves. The murmur lulled me, and in a short time I slept soundly.
I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I awoke I found that the
sun had already mounted considerably. The wind was high and the waves continually threatened the
safety of my little skiff. I found the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the
coast from which I had embarked. I endeavored to change my course, but quickly found that if I
again made the attempt the abode would instantly be filled with water. Thus situated, my only
resource was to drive before the wind. I confess that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no
compass with me, and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the world
that the sun was of little benefit to me. I might be driven into the wild Atlantic
and feel all the torches of starvation, or be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that
roared and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning
thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked upon the heavens which were covered by clouds that
flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others. I looked upon the sea. It was to be my grave.
Fiend! I exclaimed. Your task is already fulfilled. I thought of Elizabeth, of my father,
and of Clairvaux, all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanctuary
and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful
that even now, when the scene is on the point of closing before me forever, I shudder to reflect on
it. Some hours passed thus, but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the horizon,
the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers.
But these gave place to a heavy swell. I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder,
when suddenly I saw a line of high land towards the south. Almost spent as I was,
by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I had endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of life
rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart and tears gushed from my eyes. How mutable are our
feelings and how strange it is that the clinging love we have of life, even in the excess of
misery! I constructed another sail with a part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards
the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I approached nearer, I easily perceived
traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself suddenly transported
back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. I carefully traced the windings of the land
and hailed a steeple at which I at length saw issuing from behind a small promontory.
As I was in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to sail towards the town as a place
where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately, I had money with me.
As I turned the promontory, I perceived a small neat town and a good harbour which I entered,
my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected escape. As I was occupied in fixing the boat
and arranging the sails, several people crowded towards the spot. They seemed much surprised at
my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that
at any other time might have produced in me a slight sensation of alarm.
As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English and I therefore addressed them in that
language. My good friends, said I, will you be so kind as to tell me the name of this town
and inform me where I am? You will know that soon enough, replied a man with a hoarse voice.
Maybe you come to a place that will not prove much to your taste,
but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you.
I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a stranger, and I was also
disconcerted on the perceiving the frowning and angry countenances of his companions.
Why do you answer me so roughly? I replied, surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to
receive strangers so inhospitably. I do not know, said the man, what the custom of the English may be,
but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains. While this strange dialogue continued,
I perceived the crowd rapidly increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger,
which annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. I inquired the way to the inn, but no one replied.
I then moved forward and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me
when an ill-looking man approaching tapped me on the shoulder and said,
Come, sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kerwin's to give an account of yourself.
Who is Mr. Kerwin? Why am I to give an account of myself? Is this not a free country?
Aye, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kerwin is a magistrate,
and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night.
This answer startled me, but I presently recovered myself. I was innocent. That could easily be
proved. Accordingly, I followed my conductor in silence and was led to one of the best houses in
the town. I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd,
I thought it politic to rouse all my strength so that no physical debility might be construed into
apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a few moments to
overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair all fear of ignominy or death. I might pause here,
for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of the frightful events which I am about
to relate in proper detail to my recollection.
I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with
calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of severity, and
then, turning towards my conductors, he asked to appear as witnesses on this occasion. About
half a dozen men came forward, and, one being selected by the magistrate, he deposed that
he had been out fishing the night before with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent,
when, about ten o'clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly
put in for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen. They did not land at the
harbor, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on first,
carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he
was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the
His companions came up to assist him, and, by the light of their lantern, they found that he had
fallen on the body of a man who was, to all appearance, dead. Their first supposition was
that it was the corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the waves,
but, on examination, they found that the clothes were not wet and even that the body was not then
cold. They instantly carried it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot and endeavored,
but in vain, to restore it to life. It appeared to be a handsome young man about five and twenty
years of age. He had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of any violence except the
black mark of fingers on his neck. The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest
me, but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned, I remembered the murder of my brother and felt
myself extremely agitated. My limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me
to lean on a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with a keen eye and, of course,
drew an unfavorable augury from my manner. The son confirmed his father's account,
but when Daniel Nugent was called, he swore positively that just before the fall of his
companion he saw a boat with a single man in it at a short distance from the shore,
and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in which I had just
landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door of her cottage,
waiting for the return of the fisherman, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body,
when she saw a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
was afterwards found. Another woman confirmed the account of the fisherman having brought the body
into her house. It was not cold. They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the town
for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing,
and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very
probable that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same
spot from which I had departed. Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the
body from another place, and it was likely that as I did not appear to know the shore, I might have
put into the harbor, ignorant of the distance of the town of Blanc, from the place where I had
deposited the corpse. Mr. Kerwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be taken into the
room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what effect the sight of it would
produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the
murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted by the magistrate and several other
persons to the inn. I could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place
during this eventful night, but, knowing that I had been conversing with several persons in the
island I had inhabited about the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly tranquil as
to the consequences of the affair. I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the
coffin. How can I describe my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror,
nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and agony. The examination,
the presence of the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory when I saw
the lifeless form of Henry Clairvaux stretched before me. I gasped for breath, and throwing
myself on the body, I exclaimed, Have my murderous machinations deprived you also,
my dearest Henry, of life? Two I have already destroyed. Other victims await their destiny,
but you, Clairvaux, my friend, my benefactor. The human frame could no longer support the agonies
that I endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this.
I lay for two months on the point of death. My ravings, as I afterward heard, were frightful.
I called myself the murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clairvaux. Sometimes I entreated
my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was tormented, and at others
I felt the fingers of the monster already grasping my neck and screamed aloud with agony and terror.
Fortunately, as I spoke my native language, Mr. Kerwin alone understood me,
but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was before, why did I not sink into forgetfulness
and rest? Death snatches away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doting parents.
How many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope,
and the next to pray for worms and the decay of the tomb? Of what materials was I made that I
could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed the
torture? But I was doomed to live, and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream,
in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by jailers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the
miserable apparatus of a dungeon. It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding.
I had forgotten the particulars of what had happened, and only felt as if some great
misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me, but when I looked around and saw the barred windows and the
swallowedness of the room in which I was, all flashed across my memory, and I groaned bitterly.
This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me. She was a
hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities
which often characterized that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
persons accustomed to see without sympathizing in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire
indifference. She addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that I had heard during
my sufferings. Are you better now, sir? said she. I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice.
I believe I am, but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am still alive
to feel this misery and horror. For that matter, replied the old woman, if you mean about the
gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you were dead, for I fancy it
will go hard with you. However, that's none of my business. I am sent to nurse you and get you well.
I do my duty with a safe conscience. It were well if everybody did the same.
I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved
on the very edge of death, but I felt languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed.
The whole series of my life appeared to me as a dream. I sometimes doubted if indeed it were
all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force of reality.
As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew feverish. A darkness pressed
around me. No one was near me who soothed me with a gentle voice of love. No dear hand supported me.
The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared them for me,
but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was
strongly marked in the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer
but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections, but I soon learned
that Mr. Kerwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be
prepared for me. Richard indeed was the best, and it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse.
It is true he seldom came to see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve
the sufferings of every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies
and miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see that I was not
neglected, but his visits were short and with long intervals. One day, while I was gradually
recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my cheeks livid like those in death.
I was overcome by gloom and misery, and often reflected I had better seek death
than desire to remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness.
At one time I considered whether I should not declare myself guilty and suffer the penalty of
the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts when the door of
my apartment was opened and Mr. Kerwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion.
He drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in French.
I fear that this place is very shocking to you. Can I do anything to make you more comfortable?
I thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me.
On the whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving.
I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to one born down as
you are by so strange a misfortune. But you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy abode,
for doubtless evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.
That is my least concern. I am, by a course of strange events, become the most miserable of
mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?
Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonizing than the strange chances that have
lately occurred. You were thrown by some surprising accident on this shore, renowned for its
vitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to
your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a manner, and placed, as it
were, by some fiend across your path. As Mr. Curwen said this, notwithstanding the agitation
I endured on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at the knowledge
he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance,
for Mr. Curwen hastened to say,
Immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on your person were brought to
me, and I examined them that I might discover some trace by which I could send to your relations in
account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and among others one which I
discovered from its commencement to be from your father. I instantly wrote to Geneva. Nearly two
months have elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are ill. Even now you tremble.
You are unfit for agitation of any kind.
The suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event.
Tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murderer I am now to lament.
Your family is perfectly well, said Mr. Curwen, with gentleness.
And someone, a friend, is come to visit you.
I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it instantly darted into
my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the death of Clairvaux,
as a new incitement for me to comply with his hellish desires.
I put my hand before my eyes and cried out in agony,
Oh, take him away! I cannot see him! For God's sake, do not let him enter!
Mr. Curwen regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could not help regarding
my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in rather a severe tone,
I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father would have been welcome
instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.
My father, cried I, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure.
Is my father indeed come? How kind, how very kind! But where is he? Why does he not hasten to me?
My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate.
Perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium,
and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence.
He rose and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.
Nothing at this moment could have given me greater pleasure than the arrival of my father.
I stretched out my hand to him and cried, Are you then safe at Elizabeth and Ernest?
My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured by dwelling on these
subjects so interesting to my heart to raise my desponding spirits. But he soon felt that a
prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. What a place is this that you inhabit, my son,
said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room.
You travel to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue you. And poor Clairvaux!
The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too great to be endured in my weak
state. I shed tears. Alas, yes, my father, replied I. Some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs
over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I should have died on the coffin of Henry.
We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health
rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kerwin came in and
insisted that my strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion, but the appearance of my
father was to me like that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness
quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate.
The image of Clairvaux was forever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation
into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas,
why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life? It was surely that I might fulfil my
destiny, which is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings
and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dust, and in executing the
award of justice I shall also sink to rest. Then the appearance of death was distant,
although the wish was ever present to my thoughts, and I often sat for hours motionless
and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.
The season of the assesies approached. I had already been three months in prison,
and although I was still weak and in continual danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel
nearly a hundred miles to the country town where the court was held. Mr. Kerwin charged himself
with every care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. I was spared the disgrace
of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not brought before the court that decides on
life and death. The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was on the Orkney
Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found, and a fortnight after my removal
I was liberated from prison. My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations
of a criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted
to return to my native country. I did not participate in these feelings, for to me the
walls of a dungeon or a palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned forever, and although
the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around me nothing but a dense and
frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me.
Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered
by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed them. Sometimes it was the watery,
clouded eyes of the monster as I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.
My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He talked of Geneva, which I should
soon visit, of Elizabeth and Ernest, but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes,
indeed, I felt a wish for happiness, and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cousin,
or longed, with a devouring malady du pays, to see once more the blue lake and rapid roan
that had been so dear to me in early childhood. But my general state of feeling was a torpor
in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature, and these fits were
seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and despair. At these moments I often endeavored to
put an end to the existence I loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance to
restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence. Yet one duty remained to me, the
recollection of which finally triumphed over my selfish despair. It was necessary that I should
return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those I so fondly loved,
and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any chance led me to the place of his concealment,
or if he dared again to blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the
existence of the monstrous image which I had endued with the mockery of a soul still more
monstrous. My father still desired to delay our departure, fearful that I could not sustain the
teagues of a journey, for I was a shattered wreck, the shadow of a human being. My strength
was gone, I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame.
Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
my father thought it best to yield. We took our passage on board a vessel bound for Havre de
Grasse, and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores. It was midnight. I lay on the deck
looking at the stars and listening to the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness
that shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when I reflected that
I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream,
yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of Ireland,
and the sea which surrounded me told me too forcibly that I was deceived by no vision,
and that Clairvaux, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the
monster of my creation. I re-passed in my memory my whole life, my quiet happiness while residing
with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered,
shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy,
and I called to mind the night in which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of thought.
A thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly. Ever since my recovery from the fever
I had been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum,
for it was by means of this drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for
the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes,
I now swallowed double my usual quantity, and soon slept profoundly.
But sleep did not afford me respite from thought and misery.
My dreams presented a thousand objects that scared me.
Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of nightmare. I felt the fiend's grasp in my neck
and could not free myself from it. Groans and cries rang in my ears. My father, who was watching over
me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me. The dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above,
the fiend was not here. A sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between
the present hour and the irresistible disastrous future, imparted to me a kind of calm forgetfulness
of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly susceptible.
The voyage came to an end. We landed and proceeded to Paris.
I soon found that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must repose before I could continue
my journey. My father's care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of
my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to seek
amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not abhorred! They were my brethren,
my fellow beings, and I felt attracted to even the most repulsive among them as to creatures of an
angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no right to share their intercourse.
I had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their
groans. How they would each and all abhor me and hunt me from the world did they know my
unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me. My father yielded at length to my
desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he
thought that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder,
and he endeavored to prove to me the futility of pride. Alas, my father, said I, how little do you
know me? Human beings, their feelings and passions would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I
pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge.
She died for it, and I am the cause of this. I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry,
they all died by my hands. My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same
assertion. When I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation,
and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness,
some idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I preserved
in my convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the
wretch I had created. I had a persuasion that I should be supposed mad, and this in itself would
forever have chained my tongue. But, besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret
which would fill my hearer with consternation, and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates
of his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy, and was silent when I would
have given the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet still words like those I have recorded
uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the
burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion, my father said, with an expression of unbounded
wonder, My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to
make such an assertion again. I am not mad, I cried energetically. The sun and the heavens
which have viewed my operations can bear witness of my truth. I am the assassin of those most
innocent victims. They died by my machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood,
drop by drop, to have saved their lives. But I could not, my father. Indeed, I could not sacrifice
the whole human race. The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and endeavored to alter the
my thoughts. He wished as much as possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that
had taken place in Ireland, and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes.
As time passed away, I became more calm. Misery had her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer
talked in the same incoherent manner of my own crimes. Sufficient for me was the consciousness
of them. By the utmost self-violence, I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes
desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed
than they had ever been since my journey to the Sea of Ice. A few days before we left Paris on
our way to Switzerland, I received the following letter from Elizabeth.
My dear friend, it gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at Paris.
You are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight.
My poor cousin, how much you must have suffered! I expect to see you looking even more ill than
when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured as I have been
by anxious suspense, yet I hope to see peace in your countenance and to find that your heart
is not totally void of comfort and tranquility. Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that
made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not disturb you at
period when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had with my uncle
previous to his departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet. Explanation? You may
possibly say, what can Elizabeth have to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered
and all my doubts satisfied. But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread
and yet be pleased with this explanation. And in a probability of this being the case, I dare not
any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often wished to express to you,
but have never had the courage to begin. You well know, Victor, that our union had been the
favorite plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young and taught
to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows
during childhood and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But as
brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each other without desiring a
more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me. I
conjure you by our mutual happiness with simple truth. Do you not love another? You have traveled,
you have spent several years of your life at Ingolstadt, and I confess to you, my friend,
that when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature,
I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honor
to fulfill the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love you and that in my airy
dreams of futurity you have been my constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness
I desire as well as my own when I declared to you that our marriage would render me eternally
miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now I weep to think that,
born down as you are by the cruelest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word honor, all hope of
that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have so disinterested
in affection for you, may increase your miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes.
Ah, Victor, be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you
not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend, and if you obey me in this
one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquility.
Do not let this letter disturb you. Do not answer tomorrow or the next day or even until you come
if it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I see but one
smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I shall need
no other happiness. Elizabeth Levenza, Geneva, May 18th, 17 blank.
This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat of the fiend.
I will be with you on your wedding night. Such was my sentence, and on that night would the
demon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which promised
partly to console my sufferings. On that night he determined to consummate his crimes by my death.
Well, be it so. A deadly struggle would then assuredly take place in which if he were victorious
I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. If he were vanquished I should be a free man.
Alas, what freedom! Such as the peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his
cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, penniless, and alone,
but free. Such would be my liberty, except that in my Elizabeth I possessed a treasure,
alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.
Sweet and beloved Elizabeth, I read and re-read her letter, and some softened feelings stole into
my heart, and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and joy. But the apple was already eaten,
and the angel's arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make her happy.
If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable. Yet, again, I considered whether my
marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner,
but if my torturer should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces,
he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge.
He had vowed to be with me on my wedding night, yet he did not consider that threat as binding
him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that he was not yet satiated with blood,
he had murdered Clairvaux immediately after the enunciation of his threats.
I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
father's happiness, my adversary's designs against my life should not retard it a single hour.
In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate.
I fear, my beloved girl, I said, little happiness remains for us on earth.
Yet all that I may one day enjoy is centered in you. Chase away your idle fears. To you alone do
I consecrate my life and my endeavors for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth,
a dreadful one. When revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from
being surprised at my misery, you will only wonder that I survive what I have endured.
I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place.
For, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us.
But until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it.
This I most earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply.
In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth's letter we returned to Geneva.
The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my
emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost
much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me, but her gentleness and soft looks of
compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I was.
The tranquility which I now enjoy did not endure. Memory brought madness with it,
and when I thought of what had passed a real insanity possessed me. Sometimes I was furious
and burnt with rage, sometimes low and despondent. I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat
motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.
Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits. Her gentle voice would soothe me
when transported by passion and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor.
She wept with me and for me. When reason returned she would remonstrate and endeavor to inspire me
with resignation. Ah, it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no
peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury that is otherwise sometimes found in indulging
the excess of grief. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
Elizabeth. I remained silent. Have you then some other attachment? None on earth. I love
Elizabeth and look forward to our union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed and on
it I will consecrate myself in life or death to the happiness of my cousin.
My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have befallen us, but let us
only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet
live. Our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune,
and when time shall have softened your despair new and dear objects of care will be born
to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived.
Such were the lessons of my father, but to me the remembrance of the threat returned.
Nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood,
I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words
I shall be with you on your wedding night I should regard the threatened fate as unavoidable.
But death was no evil to me if the laws of Elizabeth were balanced with it,
and I therefore with a contented and even cheerful countenance agreed with my father
that if my cousin would consent the ceremony should take place in ten days,
and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate.
Great God, if for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish intention of my fiendish
adversary I would rather have banished myself forever from my native country and wandered a
cast over the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if possessed of magic
powers, the monster had blinded me to his real intentions, and when I thought that I had prepared
only my own death I hastened that of a far dearer victim. As the period fixed for our marriage drew
nearer, whether from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I
concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the countenance of
my father, but hardly deceived the ever watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth.
She looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear,
which past misfortunes had impressed that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might
soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.
Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own heart,
the anxiety that prayed there, and entered with seeming earnestness into the plans of my father,
although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy.
Through my father's exertions a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to
her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was
to spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood.
In the meantime, I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should
openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the watch to
prevent artifice, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquility. Indeed, as the
period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be regarded as worthy to disturb
my peace, while the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as
the day fixed for its solemnization drew nearer, and I heard it continually spoken of as an
occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent. Elizabeth seemed happy. My tranquil demeanor
contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfill my wishes and my destiny
she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her. And perhaps also she thought of
the dreadful secret which I had promised to reveal to her on the following day.
My father was in the meantime overjoyed and in the bustle of preparation
only recognized in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.
After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my father's, but it was agreed that
Elizabeth and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing
our voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favorable, all smiled on our nuptial
embarkation. Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness.
We passed rapidly along, the sun was hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy,
while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw Mount
Salève, the pleasant banks of Mont-Alegre, and at a distance surmounting all, the beautiful
Mont Blanc and the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavored to emulate her. Sometimes
coasting the opposite banks we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that
would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should
wish to enslave it. I took the hand of Elizabeth. You are sorrowful, my love. Ah, if you knew what
I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would endeavor to let me taste the quiet and
freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy. Be happy, my dear Victor,
replied Elizabeth. There is, I hope, nothing to distress you, and be assured that if a lively joy
is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not to depend too much
on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe
how fast we move along, and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the
dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the
innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble
that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!
Thus Elizabeth endeavored to divert her thoughts and mind from all reflection upon melancholy
subjects. But her temper was fluctuating, joy for a few instants shown in her eyes,
but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie.
The sun sank lower in the heavens. We passed the river Drance and observed its path through the
chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake,
and we approached the amphitheater of mountains which formed its eastern boundary.
The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range of mountain above
mountain by which it was overhung. The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing
rapidity, sank at sunset to a light breeze. The soft air just ruffled the water and caused a
pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful
scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touched the
shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me forever.
It was eight o'clock when we landed. We walked for a short time on the shore, enjoying the
transitory light, and then retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters,
woods and mountains, obscured in darkness yet still displaying their black outlines.
The wind, which had followed in the south, now rose with great violence in the west.
The moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was beginning to descend. The clouds swept
across it swifter than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected
the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning
to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been calm during the day,
but so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears rose in my mind.
I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped the pistol which was hidden in my bosom.
Every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from
the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished.
Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her and trembling,
she asked. What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor? What is it you fear?
Oh, peace, peace, my love, I replied. This night and all will be safe,
but this night is dreadful, very dreadful. I passed an hour in this state of mind when
suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife,
and earnestly I entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had
obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages of the
house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary,
but I discovered no trace of him and was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate
chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his menaces, when suddenly I heard a shrill and
fearful scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had retired. As I heard it,
the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fiber
was suspended. I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of
my limbs. The state lasted but for an instant. The scream was repeated, and I rushed into the room.
Great God, why did I not then expire? Why am I here to relate the destruction of the best hope
and the purest creatures of earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed,
her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair.
Everywhere I turn I see the same figure, her bloodless arms in relaxed form, flung by the
murderer on its bridled rear. Could I behold this and live? Alas, life is obstinate and clings
closest where it is most hated. For a moment only did I lose recollection. I fell senseless on the
ground. When I recovered I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn, their countenance
expressed a breathless terror. But the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow
of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth,
my love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the posture in
which I had first beheld her, and now as she lay, her head upon her arms and a handkerchief
thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards her and
embraced her with ardor, but the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I
now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished. Their murderous
mark of the fiend's grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips.
While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up. The windows
of the room had before been darkened, and I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light
of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of
horror not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred.
A grin was on the face of the monster. He seemed to jeer as with his fiendish finger
he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window and, drawing pistol
from my bosom, fired, but he eluded me, leapt from his station and running with the swiftness of
plunged into the lake. The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to the
spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats. Nets were cast but in vain.
After passing several hours, we returned. Hopeless, most of my companions believing
it to have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search
the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and vines. I attempted to accompany
them and proceed the short distance from the house, but my head whirled round. My steps were
like those of a drunken man, and I felt at last in a state of utter exhaustion. A film covered my
eyes and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state, I was carried back and placed
on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened. My eyes wandered round the room as if to seek
something that I had lost. After an interval, I rose and, as if by instinct, crawled into the
my beloved lay. There were women weeping around. I hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs.
All this time, no distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to their
various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause. I was bewildered
in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder
of Clairvaux, and lastly of my wife. Even at that moment, I knew not that my only remaining friends
were safe from the malignity of the fiend. My father, even now, might be writhing under his
grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to
action. I started up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.
There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake, but the wind was unfavorable
and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to
arrive by night. I hired men to row and took my oar myself, where I had always experienced relief
from mental torment and bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt and the excess of
agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning
my head upon my hands gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes
which were familiar to me in my happier time, and which I had contemplated but the day before in
the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. The
rain had ceased for a moment, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours
before. They had then been observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great
and sudden change. The sun might shine or the crowds might lure, but nothing could appear to
me as it had done the day before. A fiend had snatched from me every hope of future happiness.
No creature had ever been so miserable as I was. So frightful an event is single in the history of
man. But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event?
Mine has been a tale of horrors. I have reached their acme, and what I must now relate can be
tedious to you. Know that one by one my friends were snatched away. I was left desolate. My own
strength is exhausted, and I must tell in a few words what remains of my hideous narration.
I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk under the tidings
I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old man, his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they
had lost their charm and their delight. He is Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he
doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having few
affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. Cursed be the fiend that brought
misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste and wretchedness. He could not live under the
horrors that were accumulated around him. The springs of existence suddenly gave way. He was
unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms. What then became of me? I
know not. I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed
upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant
bales with the friends of my youth, but I awoke and found myself in a dungeon. Melancholy followed,
but by degrees I gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation, and was then
released from my prison, for they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood,
a solitary cell had been my habitation. Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I
not, as I awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of my past
pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their cause, the monster whom I had created, the
miserable demon whom I had sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed
by a maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might
have him within my grasp to wreak a great and single revenge on his cursed head.
Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes. I began to reflect on the best means
of securing him, and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal
and told him that I had an accusation to make, that I knew the destroyer of my family, and that
I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. Be assured, sir, he said. No pains or
exertion on my part shall be spared to discover the villain.
Thank you, I replied. Listen therefore to the deposition that I have to make. It is indeed a
tale so strange that I should fear you would not credit it were it not something in truth which,
however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream,
and I have no motive for falsehood. My manner, as I thus addressed him,
was impressive but calm. I had formed in my own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death,
and this purpose quieted my agony, and for an interval reconciled me to life.
I now relate my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates
with accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous,
but as I continued he became more attentive and interested.
I saw him sometimes shudder with horror, and others a lively surprise,
unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance.
When I had concluded my narration, I said, This is the being whom I accuse,
and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power.
It is your duty as magistrate, and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not
revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion.
The address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own auditor.
He had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given to a tale of spirits
and supernatural events, but when he was called upon to act officially in consequence,
the whole tide of his incredulity returned.
He, however, answered mildly, I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit,
but the creature of whom you speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions
to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice,
and inhabit caves and dens where no man would venture to intrude?
Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes,
and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.
I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit, and if he has indeed taken
refuge in the Alps he may be hunted like the Chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey,
but I perceive your thoughts. You do not credit my narrative,
and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert.
As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes. The magistrate was intimidated.
You are mistaken, said he. I will exert myself,
and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment
proportionate to his crimes, but I fear from what you have yourself described to be his properties
that this will prove impracticable, and thus while every proper measure is pursued,
you should make up your mind to disappointment. That cannot be, but all that I can say will be
of little avail. My revenge is of no moment to you, yet while I allow it to be a vice,
I confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My rage is unspeakable.
When I reflect that the murderer whom I have turned loose upon society still exists,
you refuse my just demand. I have but one resource, and I devote myself,
either in my life or death, to his destruction.
I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this. There was a frenzy in my manner,
and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness which the martyrs of old are said
to have possessed. But to a German magistrate whose mind was occupied by far other ideas
than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mine had much the appearance of madness.
He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse, as a child, and reverted to my tale as the effects
of delirium. Man, I cried, how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease! You know
not what it is you say. I broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate.
I broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate on some other mode of action.
Frankenstein by Mary Shelley.
My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost.
I was hurried away by fury.
Revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure.
It molded my feelings and allowed me to be calculating and calm.
At periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been my portion.
My first resolution was to quit Geneva forever.
My country, which when I was happy and beloved was dear to me, now in my adversity became hateful.
I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.
And now my wanderings began, which are to cease but with life.
I have traveled a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travelers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet.
How I have lived I hardly know.
How many times I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death.
But revenge kept me alive.
I dare not die and leave my adversary in being.
When I quitted Geneva, my first labor was to gain some clue by which I might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy.
But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue.
As night approached, I found myself at the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed.
I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves.
Everything was silent, except the leaves of the trees which were gently agitated by the wind.
The night was nearly dark, and the scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer.
The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast shadow, which was felt but not seen around the head of the mourner.
The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to rage and despair.
They were dead, and I lived.
Their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence.
I knelt on the grass and kissed the earth, and with quivering lips exclaimed,
By the sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me,
By the deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear, and by thee, O night,
And the spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the demon who caused this misery,
Until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict, for this purpose I will preserve my life.
To execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth,
Which otherwise should vanish from my eyes forever, and I call on you, spirits of the dead,
And on you wandering ministers of vengeance to aid and conduct me in my work.
Let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony.
Let him feel the despair that now torments me.
I had begun my adjuration with solemnity, and an awe which almost assured me
That the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion.
But the furies possessed me, as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
I was answered through the stillness of the night by a loud and fiendish laugh.
It rang on my ears long and heavily. The mountains re-echoed it,
And I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by frenzy,
And have destroyed my miserable existence, but that my vow was heard,
And that I was reserved for vengeance.
The laughter died away.
When a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear,
Addressed me in an audible whisper.
I am satisfied, miserable wretch. You have determined to live, and I am satisfied.
I darted towards a spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp.
Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose, and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape,
As he fled with more than mortal speed.
I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task.
Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhône, but vainly.
The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance I saw the fiend enter by night,
And hide himself in a vessel band bound for the Black Sea.
I took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how.
Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I have ever followed in his track.
Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, inform me of his path.
Sometimes he himself, who feared that if I lost all trace of him, I should despair and die, left some mark to guide me.
The snows descended on my head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white plain.
To you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown,
How can you understand what I have felt and still feel?
Cold, want, and fatigue, were the least pains of which I was destined to endure.
I was cursed by some devil, and carried about with me my eternal hell.
Yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my step, and when I most murmured,
Would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties.
Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sunk under the exhaustion,
A repast was prepared for me in the desert, that restored and inspirited me.
The fair was indeed coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate,
But I will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had invoked to aid me.
Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I was parched by thirst,
A slight cloud would bedim the sky, and shed a few drops that revived me and vanished.
I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers, but the demon generally avoided these,
As it was here that the population of the country chiefly collected.
In other places human beings were seldom seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path.
I had money with me, and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it,
While I brought with me some food that I had killed, which after taking small part,
I always presented to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.
My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me,
And it was during sleep alone that I could taste joy. Oh, blessed sleep!
Often, when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture.
The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness,
That I might retain strength to fulfill my pilgrimage.
Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships.
During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night,
For in sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved country.
Again I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice,
And beheld Clerval, enjoying health and youth.
Often, when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should come,
And that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends.
What agonizing fondness did I feel for them? How did I cling to their fears, to their...
What agonizing fondness did I feel for them? How did I cling to their dream forms,
As sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that they still lived?
At such moments, vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart,
And I pursued my path towards the destruction of the demon,
More as a task enjoined by heaven,
As the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious,
Than as the ardent desire of my soul.
What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know.
Sometimes, indeed, he left marks in writing on the bark of the trees,
Or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury.
My reign is not yet over.
These words were legible in one of these inscriptions.
You live, and my power is complete. Follow me.
I seek the everlasting ices of the north,
Where you will feel the misery of cold and frost to which I am impassive.
You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare.
Eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy.
We have yet to wrestle for our lives,
But many hard and miserable hours must you endure,
Until that period shall arrive.
Scoffing devil, again do I vow vengeance,
Again do I devote thee, miserable fiend to torture and death.
Never will I give up my search until he or I perish,
And then with what ecstasy shall I join my Elizabeth
And my departed friends who even now prepare for me
The reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage.
As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened,
And the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support.
The peasants were shut up in their hovels,
And only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals
Whom starvation had forced from their hiding places to seek for prey.
The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured,
And thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.
The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labors.
One inscription that he left was in these words,
Prepare, your toil is only begin.
Wrap yourself in furs, and provide food, for we shall soon enter
Upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.
My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words.
I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support me,
I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
Until the ocean appeared at a distance, and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon.
Oh, how unlike it was to the blue seasons of the south!
Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness.
The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia,
And hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils.
I did not weep, but I knelt down, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirits for conducting me
In safety to the place where I hoped, not withstanding my adversary's jibe,
To meet and grapple with him.
Some weeks before this period I had procured a sled and dogs,
And thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed.
I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that as before
I had daily lost ground in the pursuit I now gained on him,
So much so that when I first saw the ocean he was but one day's journey in advance,
And I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach.
With new courage therefore I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore.
I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information.
A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
Putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance.
He had carried off their store of winter food and, placing it in a sledge, to draw,
Which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs.
He had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers,
Had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land,
And they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the ice frozen by the eternal frosts.
On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair.
He had escaped me, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey
Across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure,
And which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive.
Yet at the idea that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned,
And, like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round,
And instigated me to toil in revenge, I prepared for my journey.
I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the frozen ocean,
And purchasing a plentiful stock of presisions.
I departed from land.
I cannot guess how many days have passed since then,
But I have endured misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution,
Burning within my heart, could have enabled me to support.
Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage,
And I often heard the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction.
But again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.
By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should guess that I had passed three weeks in this journey,
And the continual protraction of hope returning back upon the heart,
Often wrung bitter drops of despondency and grief from my eyes.
Despair had indeed almost secured her prey,
And I should soon have sunk beneath this misery.
Once after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain,
And one, sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish,
When suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain.
I strained my sight to discover what it could be,
And uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge,
And the distorted proportions of a well-known form within.
Oh, with what burning gush did hope revisit my heart,
Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away,
That they might not intercept the view I had of the demon.
But still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops,
Until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud.
But this was not the time for delay.
I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion,
Gave them a plentiful portion of food,
And after an hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary,
And yet, which was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route.
The sledge was still visible, nor did I again lose sight of it,
Except at the moment when, for a short time,
Some ice rock concealed it with its intervening crags.
I indeed perceptibly gained on it,
And when, after nearly two days' journey,
I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant,
My heart bounded within me.
But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe,
My hopes were suddenly extinguished,
And I lost all trace of him more utterly than I had ever done before.
A ground sea was heard, the thunder of its progress
As the waters rolled and swelled beneath me,
Became every moment more ominous and terrific.
I pressed on, but in vain.
The wind rose and the sea roared,
And, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake,
It split and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound.
The work was soon finished.
In a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy,
And I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice
That was continually lessening,
And thus preparing for me a hideous death.
In this manner many an appalling hours passed.
Several of my dogs died,
And I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress
When I saw your vessel riding at anchor,
And holding forth to me hopes of succor and life.
I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north
And was astounded at the sight.
I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars,
And by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue,
To move my ice raft in the direction of your ship.
I had determined, if you were going southward,
Still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas
Rather than abandon my purpose.
I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat
With which I could pursue my enemy,
But your direction was northward.
You took me on board when my vigor was exhausted,
And I should soon have sunk under my multiple-eyed hardships
Into a death which I still dread,
For my task is unfulfilled.
Oh, when will my guiding spirit in conducting me to the demon
Allow me the rest I so much desire,
Or must I die, and he yet live?
If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape,
That you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death.
And do I dare to ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage
To endure the hardships that I have undergone?
No, I am not so selfish.
Yet when I am dead, if he should appear,
If the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you,
Swear that he shall not live,
Swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes,
And survive to add to the list of his dark crimes.
He is eloquent and persuasive,
And once his words had even power over my heart,
But trust him not, his soul is as hellish as his form,
Full of treachery and fiendlike malice.
Hear him not.
Call on him the mains of William, Justine,
Clairvaux, Elizabeth, my father and the wretched Victor,
And thrust your sword into his heart.
I will hover near and direct the steel aright.
Walton, in continuation.
August 26th, 17 something.
You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret.
And do you not feel your blood congeal with horror,
Like that which even now curdles mine?
Sometimes, seized with sudden agony,
He could not continue his tale.
At others his voice broken, yet piercing,
Uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish.
His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation,
Now subdued to downcast sorrow,
And quenched in infinite wretchedness.
Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones,
And related the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice,
Suppressing every mark of agitation.
Then, like a volcano bursting forth,
His face would suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage,
As he shrieked out,
Impreciations on his persecutor.
His tale is connected,
And told with an appearance of the simplest truth.
Yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Saffy,
Which he showed me,
And the apparition of the monster seen from our ship,
Brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative
Than his assertiveness,
However earnest and connected.
Such a monster has, then, real existence.
I cannot doubt it.
Yet I am lost in surprise and admiration.
Sometimes I endeavored to gain from Frankenstein
The particulars of his creature's formation,
But on this point he was impenetrable.
Are you mad, my friend, said he,
Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you?
Would you also create for yourself and the world a demonical enemy?
Peace, peace!
Learn my miseries and do not seek to increase your own.
Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history.
He asked to see them,
And then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
But principally in giving me the life
And spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy.
Since you have preserved my narration, said he,
I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.
Thus has a week passed away
While I have listened to the strangest tale
That ever imagination formed.
My thoughts and every feeling of my soul
Have been drunk up by the interest of my guest,
Which this tale and his own elevated and gentle manners have created.
I wish to soothe him, yet I can counsel one
So indefinitely miserable,
So destitute of every hope and consolation.
Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history.
He asked to see them,
And then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
But principally in giving me the life
And spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy.
Since you have preserved my narration, said he,
I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.
Thus has a week passed away
While I have listened to the strangest tale
That ever imagination formed.
My thoughts and every feeling of my soul
Have been drunk up by the interest of my guest,
Which this tale and his own elevated gentle manners have created.
I wish to soothe him, yet I can counsel one
So infinitely miserable,
So destitute of every hope and consolation to live.
Oh no, the only joy that he can now know
Will be when he composes his shattered spirit
To peace and death.
Yet he enjoys one comfort,
The offspring of solitude and delirium.
He believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his friends
And derives from that communion consolation for his miseries
Or excitements to his vengeance,
That they are not the creations of his fancy,
But the beings themselves who visit from the regions of a remote world.
This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries
That render them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.
Our conversations are not always confined
To his own history and misfortunes.
On every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge
And a quick and piercing apprehension.
His eloquence is forcible and touching,
Nor can I hear him when he relates a pathetic incident
Or endeavors to move the passions of pity or love without tears.
What a glorious creature must he have been in the days of his prosperity
When he is thus noble and godlike in ruin.
He seems to feel his own worth in the greatness of his fall.
When younger, said he, I believe myself destined for some great enterprise.
My feelings are profound,
But I possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements.
This sentiment of worth, of my nature, supported me
When others would have been oppressed.
For I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief
Those talents that might be useful to my fellow creatures.
When I reflected on the work I had completed
No less than one, no lesser one than the creation of a sensitive and rational animal.
I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors.
But this thought, which supported me in my commencement of my career,
Now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust.
All my speculations and hopes are as nothing and,
Like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence,
I am chained to an eternal hell.
My imagination was vivid,
Yet my powers of analysis and application were intense.
By the union of these qualities I conceived the idea
And executed the creation of a man.
Even now I cannot recollect, without passion,
My reveries while the work was incomplete.
I trod heaven in my thoughts,
Now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of their effects.
From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and lofty ambition.
But how I am sunk.
Oh, my friend, if you had known me as I once was,
You would not recognize me in this state of degradation.
Despondency rarely visited my heart.
A high destiny seemed to bear me on until I fell,
Never, never again to rise.
Must I then lose this admirable being?
I have longed for a friend.
I have sought one who would sympathize with and love me.
Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one.
But I have fear I have gamed him
Only to know his value and lose him.
I would reconcile him to life.
But he repulses the idea.
I thank you, Walton, he said,
For your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch.
But when you speak of new tides and fresh affections,
Think you that any can replace those who are gone.
Can any man be to me as Clairvaux was,
Or any woman another Elizabeth?
Even where the affections are not strongly moved
By any superior excellence,
The companions of our childhood always possess
A certain power over our minds,
Which hardly any later friend can obtain.
They know our infinite dispositions,
Which, however they may be afterwards modified,
Are never eradicated.
They can judge of our actions
With more certain conclusions
As to the integrity of our motives.
A sister or a brother can never,
Unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
Suspect the other of fraud or false dealings,
When another friend, however strongly he may be attached,
May, in spite of himself,
Be contemplated with suspicion.
But I enjoyed friends dear not only
Through habit and association,
But from their own merits.
And wherever I am, the soothing voice of my Elizabeth
And the conversations of Clairvaux
Will ever be whispered in my ear.
They are dead,
But one feeling in such a solitude
Can persuade me to preserve my life.
If I were engaged in any high undertaking
Or design,
Fraught with extensive utility
To my fellow creatures,
Then I could live to fulfill it,
But such is not my destiny.
I must pursue and destroy the being
To whom I have gave existence.
Then my lot on earth will be fulfilled,
And I may die.
September 2nd.
My beloved sister,
I write to you encompassed by peril
And ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again
My dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it.
I am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape
And threaten every moment to crush my vessel.
The brave fellows who I have persuaded to be
My companions look towards me for aid,
But I have none to bestow.
There is something terribly appalling in our situation,
Yet my courage and hopes do not desert me.
Yet it is terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men
Are endangered through me.
If we are lost, my mad, mad schemes are the cause.
And what, Margaret,
Will be the state of your mind?
You will not hear of my destruction,
And you will anxiously await my return.
Years will pass and you will have visiting of despair
And yet be tortured by hope.
Oh, my beloved sister, the sickening failing
Of your heartfelt expectations is in prospect
More terrible to me than my own death,
But you have a husband and lovely children.
You may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so.
My unfortunate guest regards me
With a tenderest compassion.
He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life
Were a possession which he valued.
He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened
To other navigators who have attempted this sea.
And in spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful
Auguries.
Even the sailors feel the power of his eloquence.
When he speaks, they no longer despair.
He rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice,
They believe these vast mountains of ice
Are molehills which will vanish before the resolutions
Of man.
These feelings are transitory.
Each day of expectation delayed fills them with fear.
And I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair.
September 5th.
A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest
That although it is highly probable that these papers
May never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it.
We are still surrounded by mountains of ice,
Still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict.
The cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate
Comrades have already found a grave amidst this
Scene of desolation.
Frankenstein has daily declined in health.
A feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes.
But he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any
Exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent
Lifelessness.
I mentioned in my last letter the fears
I entertained of a mutiny.
This morning as I sat, watching the wan countenance
Of my friend, his eyes half closed and his limbs
Hanging listlessly, I was roused by half a dozen
Of the sailors who demanded admission into the cabin.
They entered, and their leader addressed me.
He told me that he and his companions had been chosen
By the other sailors to come in deputation to me,
To make a requisition, which injustice I could not
Refuse.
We were immured in ice, and should probably never
Escape, but they feared that if, as was possible,
The ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened,
I should be rash enough to continue my voyage,
And lead them into fresh dangers, after which they
Might happily have surmounted this.
They insisted, therefore, that I should engage with
A solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed,
I would instantly direct my course southward.
Their speech troubled me.
I had not despaired, nor had I yet conceived
The idea of returning if set free.
Yet I could injustice, yet could I injustice,
Or even impossibility, refuse this demand.
I hesitated before I answered,
When Frankenstein, who had at first been silent
And indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend,
Now roused himself.
His eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary
Vigor.
Turning towards the men, he said, What do you mean?
What do you demand of your captain?
Are you then so easily turned from your design?
Did you not call this a glorious expedition?
And wherefore was it glorious?
Not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea,
But because it was full of dangers and terror,
Because at every new incident,
Your fortitude was to be called forth,
And your courage exhibited,
Because danger and death surrounded it,
And these you were to brave and overcome.
For this it was glorious, and for this it was
An honorable undertaking.
You were hereafter to be hailed
As the benefactors of your species,
Your names adored as belonging to the brave men
Who encountered death for honor,
And the benefit of mankind.
And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger,
Or, if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial
Of your courage, you shrink away,
And are content to be handed down as men
Who had not strength enough to endure cold imperil.
And so poor souls were chilly
And returned to their warm firesides.
Why, that requires not this preparation.
Ye need not have come thus far,
And dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat,
Merely to prove yourself cowards.
Oh, be men, or be more than men.
Be steady to your purposes, and firm as a rock.
This ice is not made of such stuff
As your hearts may be.
It is mutable and cannot withstand you.
If you say that it shall not, do not return to your families
With the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows.
Return as heroes who have fought and conquered,
And who know not what it is to turn back,
Turn their backs on the foe.
He spoke this with a voice
So modulated to the different feelings
Expressed in his speech, with an eye
So full of lofty design and heroism,
That can you wonder that these men were moved?
They looked at one another and were unable to reply.
I spoke.
I told them to retire and consider of what had been said,
That I would not lead them farther north
If they strenuously desired the contrary,
But that I hoped that, with reflection,
Their courage would return.
They retired, and I turned towards my friend,
But he was sunk in languor,
And almost deprived of life.
How all this will terminate, I know not.
But I had rather die than return shamefully,
My purpose unfulfilled.
Yet I fear such will be my fate.
The men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honor,
Can never willingly continue to endure
Their present hardship.
September 7th. The die is cast.
I have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision.
I come back ignorant and disappointed.
It requires more philosophy than I possess
To bear this injustice with patience.
September 12th.
It is past.
I am returning to England.
I have lost my hopes of utility and glory.
I have lost my friend.
But I will endeavor to detail these bitter circumstances to you,
My dear sister, and while I am wafted towards England
And towards you, I will not despond.
September 9th. The ice began to move,
And roarings like thunder were heard at a distance,
As the island split and cracked
In every direction.
We were in the most imminent peril,
But as we could only remain passive,
My chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest,
Whose illness increased in such a degree
That he was entirely confined to his bed.
The ice cracked behind us and was driven
With force towards the north.
A breeze sprung from the west,
And on the 11th the passage towards the south
Became perfectly free.
When the sailors saw this, and that their return to the native country
Was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy
Broke from them, loud and long continued.
Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked
The cause of the tumult.
They shout, I said, because they will soon
Return to England.
Do you then really return?
Alas, yes, I cannot withstand their demands.
I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger.
I must return.
Do so, if you will, but I will not.
You may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me
By heaven, and I dare not.
I am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance
Will endow me with sufficient strength.
Saying this, he endeavored to spring from the bed,
But the exertion was too great for him.
He fell back and fainted.
It was not long before he was restored,
And I often thought that life was entirely extinct.
At length he opened his eyes,
He breathed with difficulty, and was unable to speak.
The surgeon gave him a composing draft,
And ordered us to leave him undisturbed.
In the meantime, he told me that my friend
Had certainly not many hours to live.
His sentence was pronounced,
And I could only grieve and be patient.
I sat by his bed, watching him.
His eyes were closed, and I thought he slept.
But presently he called to me in a feeble voice,
And bidding me come near, said,
Alas, the strength I relied on is gone.
I feel that I soon shall die,
And he, my enemy and persecutor,
May still be in being.
Think not, Walton, that in the last moments
Of my existence I feel that burned hatred
And ardent desire of revenge I once expressed,
But I feel myself justified in desiring
The death of my adversary.
During these last days I have been occupied
In examining my past conduct,
Nor do I find it blamable.
In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created
A rational creature and was bound towards him
To assure, as far as was in my power,
His happiness and well-being.
This was my duty, but there was another
Still paramount to that.
My duties towards the beings of my own species
Had greater claims to my attention,
Because they included a greater proportion
Of happiness or misery.
Urged by this view, I refused,
And did right in refusing to create a companion
For the first creature.
He showed unparalleled malignity
And selfishness in evil.
He destroyed my friends.
He devoted to destruction
Beings who possessed exquisite sensations,
Happiness and wisdom.
Nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance may end,
Miserable himself, that he may render no other wretched.
He ought to die.
The task of this destruction was mine, but I have failed.
When actuated by selfish and vicious motives,
I asked you to undertake
My unfinished work,
And I renew this request now,
When I am only induced by reason and virtue.
Yet I cannot ask you to renounce
Your country and friends to fulfill this task.
And now that you are returning to England,
You will have little chance of meeting with him,
But the consideration of these points
And the well-balancing of what you may esteem
Your duties, I leave to you.
My judgment and ideas are already disturbed
By the near approach of death.
I dare not ask you to do what I think right,
For I may still be misled by passion.
That he should live to be an instrument of mischief
Disturbs me in other respects this hour,
When I momentarily expect my release
Is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years.
The forms of the beloved dead
Flip before me, and I hasten to their arms.
Farewell, Walton.
Seek happiness in the tranquility,
And avoid ambition, even if it be only
The apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself
In science and discoveries.
Yet why do I say this?
I have myself been blasted in these hopes.
Yet another may succeed.
His voice became faint as he spoke,
And at length, exhausted by his effort,
He sunk into silence.
About half an hour afterwards,
He attempted again to speak, but was unable.
He pressed my hand feebly,
And his eyes closed forever,
While the irradiation of a gentle smile
Passed away from his lips.
Margaret, what comment can I make
On the untimely extinction of this glorious spirit?
What can I say that will enable you
To understand the depth of my sorrow?
All that I should express
Would be inadequate and feeble.
My tears flow.
My mind is overshadowed by a cold,
A cloud of disappointment.
But I journey towards England,
And I may there find consolation.
I am interrupted. What do these sounds pretend?
It is midnight, the breeze blows fairly,
And the watch on deck scarcely stir.
Again there is a sound as of a human voice,
But horser. It comes from the cabin
Where the remains of Frankenstein still lie.
I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister.
Great God, what a scene has just taken place!
I am yet dizzy with remembrance of it.
I hardly know whether I shall have the power
To detail it, yet the tale which I have recorded
Would be incomplete without this final
And wonderful catastrophe. I enter the cabin
Where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend.
Over him hung a form
Which I cannot find words to describe,
Gigantic in stature, yet uncouth
And distorted in its proportions.
As he hung over the coffin his face was concealed
By long locks of ragged hair, but one vast hand
Was extended in colour and apparent texture
Like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound
Of my approach he ceased to utter exclamations
Of grief and horror and sprung towards the window.
Never before did I behold a vision
So horrible as his face, of such loathsome
Yet appalling hideousness.
I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured
To recollect what were my duties with regard
To this destroyer. I called on him to stay.
He paused, looking on me with wonder
And again turning towards the lifeless form
Of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence
And every feature and gesture seemed instigated
By the wildest rage of some uncontrollable
Passion.
That is also my victim, he exclaimed.
In his murder my crimes
Are consummated. The miserable series
Of my being is wound to its close.
That is also my victim,
He exclaimed. In his murder
My crimes are consummated.
The miserable series of my being
Is wound to its close.
O Frankenstein,
Generous and self-devoted being,
What does it avail
That I now ask thee to pardon me?
I, who irretrievably
Destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovest,
Alas, he is cold.
He cannot answer me.
His voice seemed suffocated
And my first impulses, which had suggested
To me the duty of obeying the dying request
Of my friend in destroying his enemy
Were now suspended by a mixture
Of curiosity and compassion.
I approached this tremendous being.
I dared not again raise my eyes to his face.
There was something so scarring and unearthly
In its ugliness.
I attempted to speak, but the words
Died away on my lips. The monster continued
To utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches.
At length I gathered resolution
To address him in a pause of the tempest
Of his passion.
Your repentance, I said, is now superfluous.
If you had listened to the voice of conscience
And heeded the strings of remorse
Before you had urged your diabolical vengeance
To this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.
And do you dream?
Said the demon.
Do you think that I was then dead to agony and remorse?
He, he continued pointing to the corpse,
He suffered not in the consummation of the deed.
Oh, not the ten thousandth portion
Of the anguish that was mine during the lingering
Detail of its execution.
A frightful selfishness hurried me on
While my heart was poisoned with remorse.
Think you that the groans
Of Clairvaux were music to my ears?
My heart was fashioned
To be susceptible of love
And sympathy, and when wretched
By the misery of vice and hatred
It did not endure the violence of the charred change
Without torture such as you cannot even imagine.
After the murder of Clairvaux
While I returned to Switzerland heartbroken and overcome,
I pitied Frankenstein, my pity amounted to horror.
I abhorred myself.
But when I discovered that he, the author at once
Of my existence and of its unspeakable torments
Dared to hope for happiness,
That while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
He sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions
From the indulgence of which I was forever barred,
Then impotent envy and bitter indignation
Filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance.
I recollected my threat
And resolved that it should be accomplished.
I knew that I was preparing myself
For a deadly torture, but I was the slave
Not the master of an impulse
Which I detested, yet I could not disobey.
Yes, when she died,
Nay, then I was not miserable.
I had cast off all feelings, subdued all anguish
To riot in the excess of my despair.
Evil, thencefore, became my good.
Urged thus far, I had no choice
But to adapt my nature to an element
Which I had willingly chosen.
The completion of my demonical design
Became an insatiable passion, and now it has ended.
There is my last victim.
I was at first touched by the expression of his misery,
Yet when I called to mind what Frankenstein
Had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion,
And when I again cast my eyes
On the lifeless form of my friend,
Indignation was rekindled within me.
Wretch, I said, it is well that you come here
To whine over the desolation that you have made.
You throw a torch into a pile of buildings,
And when they are consumed you sit among the ruins
And lament the fall, hypocritical fiend.
If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object.
Again would he become the prey
Of your accursed vengeance.
It is not pity that you feel.
You lament only because the victim of your malignity
Is withdrawn from your power.
Oh, it is not thus,
Not thus interrupted the being.
Yet such must be the impression conveyed to you
By what appears to be the purport of my actions.
Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
No sympathy may I ever find.
When I first sought it, it was the love of virtue,
The feelings of happiness and affection,
With which my whole being overflowed
That I wished to be participated.
But now that virtue has become to me a shadow,
And that happiness and affection are turned
Into bitter and loathing despair,
In what should I seek for sympathy?
I am content to suffer alone,
While my suffering shall endure.
When I die, I am well satisfied
That abhorrence and opprobrium
Should load my memory.
Once my fancy was soothed
With dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment.
Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings who,
Pardoning my outward form, would love me
For the excellent qualities
Which I was capable of unfolding.
I was nourished with high thoughts of honor and devotion.
But now crime has degraded me
Beneath the meanest animal.
No guilt, no mischief,
No malignity, no misery
Can be found comparable to mine.
When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins,
I cannot believe that I am the same creature
Whose thoughts were once filled with sublime
And transcendent visions of the beauty
And the majesty of goodness.
But it is even so.
The fallen angel becomes a malignant devil.
Yet even that enemy of God and man
Had friends and associates in his desolation.
I am alone.
You who call Frankenstein your friend
Seem to have a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes.
But in the detail which he gave you
Of them he could not sum up the hours
And months of misery which I endured
Wasting in impotent passions.
For while I destroyed his hopes
I did not satisfy my own desires.
They were forever ardent and craving.
Still I desired love
And fellowship.
And I was still spurned.
Was there no injustice in this?
Am I to be thought the only criminal
When all humankind simmed against me?
Why do you not hate Felix
Who drove his friend from the door with contumely?
Why do you not execrate
The rustic who sought to destroy
The savior of his child?
Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings.
I, the miserable and the abandoned
Am an abortion to be spurned at,
Kicked and trampled on.
Even now my blood boils
At the recollection of this injustice.
But it is true that I am a wretch.
I have murdered the lovely and the helpless.
I have strangled the innocent as they slept
And grasped to death his throat
Who never injured me or any other living thing.
I have devoted my creator
The select specimen of all that is worthy of love
And admiration among men to misery.
I have pursued him
Even to that irredeemable ruin.
There he lies, white and cold in death.
You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal
That with which I regard myself.
I look on the hands which executed the deed
I think of the heart
In which the imagination of it was conceived
And long for the moment when these hands will meet my eyes
When that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.
Fear not that I shall be instrument
Of future mischief.
My work is nearly complete.
Neither yours nor any man's death
Is needed to consummate the series of my being
And accomplish that which must be done.
But it requires my own.
Do not think that I shall be slow
To perform this sacrifice.
I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft
Which brought me thither
And shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe.
I shall collect my funeral pile
And consume to ashes this miserable frame
That it remains.
Its remains may afford no light to any curious
And unhallowed wretch who would create
Such another as I have been.
I shall die. I shall no longer feel the agonies
Which now consume me
Or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied yet unquenched.
He is dead
Who called me into being
And when I shall be no more
The very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish.
I shall no longer see the sun or stars
Or feel the winds play on my cheeks.
Light, feeling and sense will pass away
And in this condition
Must I find my happiness.
Some years ago
When the images
Which this world affords first opened upon me
When I felt the cheering warmth of summer
And heard the rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds
And these were all to me
I should have wept to die.
Now it is my only consolation
Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse
Where can I find rest but in death?
Farewell
I leave you and in the last of the humankind
Whom these eyes
Will ever behold.
Farewell, Frankenstein
If thou were yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me
It would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction
But it was not so
Thou didst not seek my extinction
That I might not cause greater wretchedness
And if yet in some mode unknown to me thou hadst not ceased
To think and feel thou wouldst not desire against me
A vengeance greater than that which I feel
Blasted as thou wert
My agony was still superior to thine
For the bitter sting of remorse
Will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death
Shall I close them forever
But soon, he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm
I shall die
And what I now feel
Be no longer felt
Soon these burning miseries will be extinct
I shall ascend my funeral pile
Triumphantly
And exult in the agony of the torturing flames
The light of that conflagration
Will fade away
My ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds
My spirit will sleep in peace
Or if it thinks
It will not surely think thus
Farewell
He sprung from the cabin window
As he said this, upon the ice raft
Which lay close to the vessel
He was soon borne away by the waves
And lost in darkness and distance
The end
Thanks for watching